ROADS OF DESTINY 39 

"I thank you," said David, again. "And now I will be 
going back to my sheep." 

*'If you would dine with me," said the man of books, "and 
overlook the smart of it, I will give you reasons at length." 

"No," said the poet, "I must be back in the fields cawing 
at my sheep." 

Back along the road to Vernoy he trudged with his poems 
under his arm. When he reached his village he turned into 
the shop of one Zeigler, a Jew out of Armenia, who sold any- 
thing that came to his hand. 

"Friend," said David, "wolves from the forest harass my 
sheep on the hills. I must purchase firearms to protect them. 
What have you.^" 

"A bad day, this, for me, friend Mignot," said Zeigler, 
spreading his hands, "for I perceive that I must sell you a 
weapon that will not fetch a tenth of its value. Only last 
week I bought from a peddler a wagon full of goods that 
he procured at a sale by a commissionaire of the crown. The 
sale was of the chateau and belongings of a great lord — I know 
not his title — who has been banished for conspiracy against 
the king. There are some choice firearms in the lot. This 
pistol — oh, a weapon fit for a prince! — it shall be only forty 
francs to you, friend Mignot — if I lost ten by the sale. But 
perhaps an arquebuse " 

"This will do," said David, throwing the money on the 
counter. "Is it charged.^" 

" I will charge it," said Zeigler. "And, for ten francs more, 
add a store of powder and ball." 

David laid his pistol under his coat and walked to his cot- 
tage. Yvonne was not there. Of late she had taken to 
gadding much among the neighbors. But a fire was glowing 
in the kitchen stove. David opened the door of it and thrust 
his poems in upon the coals. As they blazed up they made 
a singing, harsh sound in the flue. 

"The song of the crow!" said the poet. 

He went up to his attic room and closed the door. So 
quiet was the village that a score of people heard the roar 



40 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

of the great pistol. They flocked thither, and up the stairs 
where the smoke, issuing, drew their notice. 

The men laid the body of the poet upon his bed, awkwardly 
arranging it to conceal the torn plumage of the poor black 
crow. The women chattered in a luxury of zealous pity. 
Some of them ran to tell Yvonne. 

M. Papineau, whose nose had brought him there among the 
first, picked up the weapon and ran his eye over its silver 
mountings with a mingled air of connoisseurship and grief. 

"The arms," he explained, aside, to the cure, "and crest of 
Monseigneur, the Marquis de Beaupertuys." 



A RETRIEVED REFORMATION 

From Roads of Destiny. First published in The Cosmopolitan 
Magazine, April, 1903. For the singular history of this story, see 
the 0. Henry Biography pages 191-194. The popularity of the story 
as a motion picture added greatly to the author's vogue, though in 
the English, French, and Spanish versions O. Henry's name was not 
mentioned. The character of Jimmy Valentine is taken from life 
but there is a close parallel to the leading incident in chapter XLII 
of Hugo's Les Miserables. The chief criticism of the story has been 
that in spite of the hero's reformation he offers his kit of burglar's 
tools to a pal instead of destroying them. O. Henry's interpre- 
tation of the character, however, is thoroughly consistent. Jimmy's 
reformation, as the title of the story intimates, was as yet incom- 
plete. It concerned himself, not his pals. He had not reached that 
maturer stage where the exemplar of a virtue becomes also its propa- 
gandist. 

A GUARD came to the prison shoe-shop, where Jimmy 
Valentine was assiduously stitching uppers, and escorted him 
to the front office. There the w^arden handed Jimmy his par- 
don, which had been signed that morning by the governor. 
Jimmy took it in a tired kind of way. He had served nearly 
ten months of a four-year sentence. He had expected to 
stay only about three months, at the longest. When a man 
w4th as many friends on the outside as Jimmy Valentine had 
is received in the ''stir" it is hardly worth while to cut his 
hair. 

"Now, Valentine," said the warden, "you'll go out in the 
morning. Brace up, and make a man of yourself. You're not 
a bad fellow at heart. Stop cracking safes, and live straight." 

"Me.^" said Jimmy, in surprise. "Why, I never cracked 
a safe in my Hfe." 

41 



42 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

"Oh, no," laughed the warden. "Of course not. Let's 
see, now. How was it you happened to get sent up on that 
Springfield job.^ Was it because you wouldn't prove an 
aUbi for fear of compromising somebody in extremely high- 
toned society? Or was it simply a case of a mean old jury 
that had it in for you.^ It's always one or the other with you 
innocent victims." 

"Me.f^" said Jimmy, still blankly virtuous. "Why, war- 
den, I never was in Springfield in my life ! " 

"Take him back, Cronin," smiled the warden, "and fix him 
up with outgoing clothes. Unlock him at seven in the morn- 
ing, and let him come to the bull-pen. Better think over 
my advice, Valentine." 

At a quarter past seven on the next morning Jimmy stood 
in the warden's outer office. He had on a suit of the villain- 
ously fitting, ready-made clothes and a pair of the stiff, 
squeaky shoes that the state furnishes to its discharged com- 
pulsory guests. 

The clerk handed him a railroad ticket and the five-dollar 
bill with which the law expected him to rehabilitate himseH 
into good citizenship and prosperity. The warden gave him 
a cigar, and shook hands. Valentine, 9762, was chronicled 
on the books "Pardoned by Governor," and Mr. James Val- 
entine walked out into the sunshine. 

Disregarding the song of the birds, the waving green trees, 
and the smell of the flowers, Jimmy headed straight for a 
restaurant. There he tasted the first sweet joys of liberty 
in the shape of a broiled chicken and a bottle of white wine 
— ^followed by a cigar a grade better than the one the war- 
den had given him. From there he proceeded leisurely to 
the depot. He tossed a quarter into the hat of a blind man 
sitting by the door, and boarded his train. Three hours set 
him down in a little town near the state line. He went to 
the cafe of one Mike Dolan and shook hands with Mike, who 
was alone behind the bar. 

"Sorry we couldn't make it sooner, Jimmy, me boy," 
said Mike. "But we had that protest from Springfield to 



A RETRIEVED REFORMATION 43 

buck against, and the governor nearly balked. Feeling all 
right?" 

"Fine," said Jimmy. "Got my key.?" 

He got his key and went upstairs, unlocking the door of 
a room at the rear. Everything was just as he had left it. 
There on the floor was still Ben Price's collar-button that had 
been torn from that eminent detective's shirt-band when they 
had overpowered Jimmy to prrest him. 

Pulling out from the wall a folding-bed, Jimmy shd back 
a panel in the wall and dragged out a dust-covered suit-case. 
He opened this and gazed fondly at the finest set of burglar's 
tools in the East. It was a complete set, made of specially 
tempered steel, the latest designs in drills, punches, braces 
and bits, jimmies, clamps, and augers, with two or three 
novelties, invented by Jimmy himself, in which he took pride. 
Over nine hundred dollars they had cost him to have made 
at , a place where they make such things for the profession. 

In half an hour Jimmy went downstairs and through the 
cafe. He was now dressed in tasteful and well-fitting clothes, 
and carried his dusted and cleaned suit-case in his hand. 

"Got anything on?" asked Mike Dolan, genially. 

"Me?" said Jimmy, in a puzzled tone. "I don't under- 
stand. I'm representing the New York Amalgamated Short 
Snap Biscuit Cracker and Frazzled Wheat Company." 

This statement delighted Mike to such an extent that 
Jimmy had to take a seltzer-and-milk on the spot. He never 
touched "hard" drinks. 

A week after the release of Valentine, 9762, there was a 
neat job of safe-burglary done in Richmond, Indiana, with 
no clue to the author. A scant eight hundred dollars was all 
that was secured. Two weeks after that a patented, im- 
proved, burglar-proof safe in Logansport was opened like 
a cheese to the tune of fifteen hundred dollars, currency; 
securities and silver untouched. That began to interest the 
rogue-catchers. Then an old-fashioned bank-safe in Jeffer- 
son City became active and threw out of its crater an erup- 
tion of bank-notes amounting to five thousand dollars. The 



44 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

losses were now high enough to bring the matter up into 
Ben Price's class of work. By comparing notes, a remark- 
able similarity in the methods of the burglaries was noticed. 
Ben Price investigated the scenes of the robberies, and was 
heard to remark: 

*' That's Dandy Jim Valentine's autograph. He's resumed 
business. Look at that combination knob — jerked out as 
easy as pulling up a radish in wet weather. He's got the 
only clamps that can do it. And look how clean those tum- 
blers were punched out! Jimmy never has to drill but one 
hole. Yes, I guess I want Mr. Valentine. He'll do his bit 
next time without any short-time or clemency foolishness." 

Ben Price knew Jimmy's habits. He had learned them 
while working up the Springfield case. Long jumps, quick 
get-aways, no confederates, and a taste for good society — 
these ways had helped Mr. Valentine to become noted as a 
successful dodger of retribution. It was given out that Ben 
Price had taken up the trail of the elusive cracksman, and 
other people w^ith burglar-proof safes felt more at ease. 

One afternoon Jimmy Valentine and his suit-case climbed 
out of the mail-hack in Elmore, a little town five miles off 
the railroad down in the black-jack country of Arkansas. 
Jimmy, looking like an athletic young senior just home from 
college, went down the board side-walk toward the hotel. 

A young lady crossed the street, passed him at the corner, 
and entered a door over which was the sign "The Elmore 
Bank." Jimmy Valentine looked into her eyes, forgot what 
he was, and became another man. She lowered her eyes and 
colored slightly. Young men of Jimmy's style and looks were 
scarce in Elmore. 

Jimmy collared a boy that was loafing on the steps of the 
bank as if he w^ere one of the stockholders, and began to ask 
him questions about the town, feeding him dimes at intervals. 
By and by the young lady came out, looking royally uncon- 
scious of the young man with the suit-case, and went her way. 

''Isn't that young lady Miss Polly Simpson.?" asked 
Jimmy, with specious guile. 



A RETRIEVED REFORMATION 45 

"Naw," said the boy. "She's Annabel Adams. Her pa 
owns this bank. What'd you come to Elmore for? Is that 
a gold watch-chain .P I'm going to get a bulldog. Got any 
more dimes.'^" 

Jimmy went to the Planters' Hotel, registered as Ralph D. 
Spencer, and engaged a room. He leaned on the desk and 
declared his platform to the clerk. He said he had come to 
Elmore to look for a location to go into business. How was 
the shoe business, now, in the town? He had thought of the 
shoe business. Was there an opening? 

The clerk was impressed by the clothes and manner of 
Jimmy. He himself was something of a pattern of fashion 
to the thinly gilded youth of Elmore, but he now perceived 
his shortcomings. While trying to figure out Jimmy's 
manner of tying his four-in-hand he cordially gave informa- 
tion. 

Yes, there ought to be a good opening in the shoe line. 
There wasn't an exclusive shoe-store in the place. The dry- 
goods and general stores handled them. Business in all lines 
was fairly good. Hoped Mr. Spencer would decide to locate 
in Elmore. He would find it a pleasant town to live in, and 
the people very sociable. 

Mr. Spencer thought he would stop over in the town a few 
days and look over the situation. No, the clerk needn't 
call the boy. He would carry up his suit-case, himseK; it 
was rather heavy. 

Mr. Ralph Spencer, the phoenix that arose from Jimmy 
Valentine's ashes— ashes left by the flame of a sudden and 
alterative attack of love— remained in Elmore, and prospered. 
He opened a shoe-store and secured a good run of trade. 

Socially he was also a success, and made many friends. 
And he accomplished the wish of his heart. He met Miss 
Annabel Adams, and became more and more captivated by 
her charms. 

At the end of a year the situation of Mr. Ralph Spencer was 
this: he had won the respect of the community, his shoe-store 
was flourishing, and he and Annabel were engaged to be mar- 



46 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

ried in two weeks. Mr. Adams, the typical, plodding, 
country banker, approved of Spencer. Annabel's pride in 
him almost equaled her affection. He was as much at home 
in the family of IVIr. x^dams and that of Annabel's married 
sister as if he were already a member. 

One day Jimmy sat down in his room and wrote this letter, 
which he mailed to the safe address of one of his old friends in 
St. Louis: 

Dear Old Pal: 

I want you to be at Sullivan's place, in Little Rock, next Wednes- 
day night, at nine o'clock. I want you to wind up some little mat- 
ters for me. And, also, I want to make you a present of my kit of 
tools. I know you'll be glad to get them — you couldn't duplicate 
the lot for a thousand dollars. Say, Billj^ I've quit the old busi- 
ness — a year ago. I've got a nice store. I'm making an honest 
living, and I'm going to marry the finest girl on earth two weeks from 
now. It's the only life, Billy — the straight one. I wouldn't touch 
a dollar of another man's money now for a million. After I get 
married I'm going to sell out and go West, where there won't be so 
much danger of having old scores brought up against me. I tell you, 
Billy, she's an angel. She believes in me; and I wouldn't do another 
crooked thing for the whole world. Be sure to be at Sully's, for I 
must see you. I'll bring along the tools with me. 

Your old friend, 

JiM\rF. 

On the Monday night after Jimmy wrote this letter, Ben 
Price jogged unobtrusively into Elmore in a livery buggy. 
He lounged about town in his quiet way until he found out 
what he wanted to know. From the drug-store across the 
street from Spencer's shoe-store he got a good look at Ralph 
D. Spencer. 

"Going to marry the banker's daughter are you, Jimmy.?" 
said Ben to himself, softly. "Well, I don't know!" 

The next morning Jimmy took breakfast at the Adamses. 
He was going to Little Rock that day to order his wedding- 
suit and buy something nice for Annabel. That would be 
the first time he had left town since he came to Elmore. It 



A RETRIEVED REFORMATION 47 

had been more than a year now since those last professional 
"jobs," and he thought he could safely venture out. 

After breakfast quite a family party went downtown to- 
gether — Mr. Adams, Annabel, Jimmy, and Annabel's mar- 
ried sister with her two little girls, aged five and nine. They 
came by the hotel where Jimmy still boarded, and he ran up 
to his room and brought along his suit-case. Then they went 
on to the bank. There stood Jimmy's horse and buggy and 
Dolph Gibson, who was going to drive him over to the rail- 
road station. 

All went inside the high, carved oak railings into the bank- 
ing-room — Jimmy included, for Mr. Adams's future son-in- 
law was welcome anywhere. The clerks were pleased to 
be greeted by the good-looking, agreeable young man who 
was going to marry Miss Annabel. Jimmy set his suit-case 
down. Annabel, whose heart was bubbling with happiness 
and lively youth, put on Jimmy's hat, and picked up the suit* 
case. "Wouldn't I make a nice drummer.?" said Annabel. 
"My! Ralph, how heavy it is.^^ Feels like it was full of gold 
bricks." 

"Lot of nickel-plated shoe-horns in there," said Jimmy, 
coolly, "that I'm going to return. Thought I'd save ex- 
press charges by taking them up. I'm getting awfully eco- 
nomical." 

The Elmore Bank had just put in a new safe and vault. 
Mr. Adams was very proud of it, and insisted on an inspec- 
tion by everyone. The vault was a small one, but it had a 
new, patented door. It fastened with three solid steel bolts 
thrown simultaneously with a single handle, and had a time- 
lock. Mr. Adams beamingly explained its workings to Mr. 
Spencer, who showed a courteous but not too intelligent in- 
terest. The two children. May and Agatha, were delighted 
by the shining metal and funny clock and knobs. 

While they were thus engaged Ben Price sauntered in and 
leaned on his elbow, looking casually inside between the rail- 
ings. He told the teller that he didn't want anything; he 
was just waiting for a man he knew. 



48 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

Suddenly there was a scream or two from the women, and 
a commotion. Unperceived by the elders. May, the nine- 
year-old girl, in a spirit of play, had shut Agatha in the vault. 
She had then shot the bolts and turned the knob of the com- 
bination as she had seen Mr. Adams do. 

The old banker sprang to the handle and tugged at it for a 
moment. "The door can't be opened," he groaned. "The 
clock hasn't been wound nor the combination set." 

Agatha's mother screamed again, hysterically. 

"Hush!" said Mr. Adams, raising his trembling hand. 
"All be quiet for a moment. Agatha! " he called as loudly as 
he could. "Listen to me." During the following silence 
they could just hear the faint sound of the child wildly shriek- 
ing in the dark vault in a panic of terror. 

"My precious darling!" wailed the mother. "She will die 
of fright! Open the door! Oh, break it open! Can't you 
men do something.?" 

"There isn't a man nearer than Little Rock who can open 
that door," said Mr. Adams, in a shaky voice. "My God. 
Spencer, what shall we do.^^ That child — she can't stand 
it long in there. There isn't enough air, and, besides, she'll 
go into convulsions from fright." 

Agatha's mother, frantic now, beat the door of the vault 
with her hands. Somebody wildly suggested dynamite. 
Annabel turned to Jimmy, her large eyes full of anguish, but 
not yet despairing. To a woman nothing seems quite im- 
possible to the powers of the man she worships. 

"Can't you do something, Ralph — try, won't you?" 

He looked at her with a queer, soft smile on his lips and in 
his keen eyes. 

"Annabel," he said, "give me that rose you are wearing, 
will you?" 

Hardly believing that she heard him aright, she unpinned 
the bud from the bosom of her dress, and placed it in his hand. 
Jimmy stuffed it into his vest-pocket, threw off his coat, and 
pulled up his shirt-sleeves. With that act Ralph D. Spencer 
passed away and Jimmy Valentine took his place. 



A RETRIEVED REFORMATION 49 

"Get away from the door, all of you," he commanded, 
shortly. 

He set his suit-case on the table, and opened it out flat. 
From that time on he seemed to be unconscious of the pres- 
ence of any one else. He laid out the shining, queer imple- 
ments swiftly and orderly, whistling softly to himself as he 
always did when at work. In a deep silence and immovable, 
the others watched him as if under a spell. 

In a minute Jimmy's pet drill was biting smoothly into the 
steel door. In ten minutes — breaking his own burglarious 
record — ^he threw back the bolts and opened the door. 

Agatha, almost collapsed, but safe, was gathered into her 
mother's arms. 

Jimmy Valentine put on his coat, and walked outside the 
railings toward the front door. As he went he thought he 
heard a far-away voice that he once knew call "Ralph!" 
But he never hesitated. 

At the door a big man stood somewhat in his way. 

"Hello, Ben!" said Jimmy, still with his strange smile. 
"Got around at last, have you.? Well, let's go. I don't 
know that it makes much difference, now." 

And then Ben Price acted rather strangely. 

"Guess you're mistaken, Mr. Spencer," he said. "Don't 
believe I recognize you. Your buggy's waiting for you, ain't 
it?" 

And Ben Price turned and strolled down the street. 



THE BRIEF DEBUT OF TILDY 

From The Four Million. First published in The World, March 27, 
1904. Stories are commonly thought of as compounded of back- 
ground or setting, character or characters, plot or plan, these con- 
stituting the short story "rule of three." But in many writers 
the background or setting is mentioned at the beginning and then 
dismissed. Not so with O. Henry. His settings are no more 
initial than terminal. They are continuous. They condition the 
talk: they flavor the adjectives, they nominate the nouns, they 
move with the verbs. Try to retell this story, and see what has gone 
out of it. You have omitted an essential, the restaurant atmosphere. 
When O. Henry's stories are called mere anecdotes, the critic is im- 
peaching nothing more than his own retold and impoverished 
product. To omit background or setting or atmosphere — call it 
what you will in O. Henry's work — is to omit the integration of both 
plot and character. Is it any more discreditable to a short story 
that it may be cut up and then summarized fragmentarily in terms 
of an anecdote than it is to a New Testament parable that it may be 
similarly mutilated and distilled into a proverb.'^ This story and 
A Lickpenny Lover have been dubbed not stories but anecdotes. 

If you do not know Bogle's Chop House and Family 
Restaurant it is your loss. For if you are one of the fortunate 
ones who dine expensively you should be interested to know 
how the other half consumes provisions. And if you belong 
to the half to whom waiters' checks are things of moment, you 
should know Bogle's, for there you get your money's worth — 
in quantity, at least. 

Bogle's is situated in that highway of bourgeoisie, that 
boulevard of Brown-Jones-and-Robinson, Eighth Avenue. 
There are two rows of tables in the room, six in each row. On 
each table is a caster-stand, containing cruets of condiments 
and seasons. From the pepper cruet you may shake a cloud 

50 



THE BRIEF DfiBUT OF TILDY 51 

of something tasteless and melancholy, like volcanic dust. 
From the salt cruet you may expect nothing. Though a man 
should extract a sanguinary stream from the pallid turnip, 
yet will his prowess be balked when he comes to wrest salt 
from Bogle's cruets. Also upon each table stands the counter- 
feit of that benign sauce made "from the recipe of a nobleman 
in India." 

At the cashier's desk sits Bogle, cold, sordid, slow, 
smouldering, and takes your money. Behind a mountain of 
toothpicks he makes your change, files your check, and ejects 
at you, like a toad, a word about the weather. Beyond a 
corroboration of his meteorological statement you would 
better not venture. You are not Bogle's friend; you are a 
fed, transient customer, and you and he may not meet again 
until the blowing of Gabriel's dinner horn. So take your 
change and go— to the devil if you like. There you, have 
Bogle's sentiments. 

The needs of Bogle's customers were supplied by two 
waitresses and a Voice. One of the waitresses was named 
Aileen. She was tall, beautiful, lively, gracious, and learned 
in persiflage. Her other name? There was no more neces- 
sity for another name at Bogle's than there was for finger- 
bowls. 

The name of the other waitress was Tildy. Why do you 
suggest Matilda? Please listen this time— Tildy— Tildy. 
Tildy was dumpy, plain-faced, and too anxious to please to 
please. Repeat the last clause to yourself once or twice, and 
make the acquaintance of the duplicate infinite. 

The Voice at Bogle's was invisible. It came from the 
kitchen, and did not shine in the way of originality. It was 
a heathen Voice, and contented itself with vain repetitions of 
exclamations emitted by the waitresses concerning food. 

Will it tire you to be told again that Aileen was beautiful? 
Had she donned a few hundred dollars' worth of clothes and 
joined the Easter parade, and had you seen her, you would 
have hastened to say so yourself. 

The customers at Bogle's were her slaves. Six tables full 



52 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

she could wait upon at once. They who were in a hurry 
restrained their impatience for the joy of merely gazing upon 
her swiftly moving, graceful figure. They who had finished 
eating ate more that they might continue in the light of her 
smiles. Every man there — and they were mostly men — 
tried to make his impression upon her. 

Aileen could successfully exchange repartee against a 
dozen at once. And every smile that she sent forth lodged, 
like pellets from a scatter-gun, in as many hearts. And all 
this while she would be performing astounding feats with 
orders of pork and beans, pot roasts, ham-and, sausage-and- 
the-wheats, and any quantity of things on the iron and in the 
pan and straight up and on the side. With all this feasting 
and flirting and merry exchange of wit Bogle's came mighty 
near being a salon, with Aileen for its Madame Recamier. 

If the transients were entranced by the fascinating Aileen, 
the regulars were her adorers. There was much rivalry 
among many of the steady customers. Aileen could have had 
an engagement every evening. At least twice a week some 
one took her to a theatre or to a dance. One stout gentleman 
whom she and Tildy had privately christened "The Hog" 
presented her with a turquoise ring. Another one known as 
"Freshy," who rode on the Traction Company's repair 
wagon, was going to give her a poodle as soon as his brother 
got the hauling contract in the Ninth. And the man who 
always ate spareribs and spinach and said he was a stock 
broker asked her to go to "Parsifal" with him. 

"I don't know where this place is," said Aileen while talk- 
ing it over with Tildy, "but the wedding-ring's got to be on 
before I put a stitch into a traveling dress — ain't that right .^^ 
Well, I guess!" 

But, Tildy! 

In steaming, chattering, cabbage-scented Bogle's there was 
almost a heart tragedy. Tildy with the blunt nose, the hay- 
colored hair, the freckled skin, the bag-o'-meal figure, had 
never had an admirer. Not a man followed her with his 
eyes when she went to and fro in the restaurant save now and 



THE BRIEF DEBUT OF TILDY 53 

then when they glared with the beast-hunger for food. None 
of them bantered her gaily to coquettish interchanges of wit. 
None of them loudly "jollied" her of mornings as they did 
Aileen, accusing her, when the eggs were slow in coming, of 
late hours in the company of envied swains. No one had 
ever given her a turquoise ring or invited her upon a voyage to 
mysterious, distant "Parsifal." 

Tildy was a good waitress, and the men tolerated her. 
They who sat at her tables spoke to her briefly with quo- 
tations from the bill of fare; and then raised their voices in 
honeyed and otherwise-flavored accents, eloquently addressed 
to the fair Aileen. They writhed in their chairs to gaze 
around and over the impending form of Tildy, that Aileen's 
pulchritude might season and make ambrosia of their bacon 
and eggs. 

And Tildy was content to be the unwooed drudge if Aileen 
could receive the flattery and the homage. The blunt nose 
was loyal to the short Grecian. She was Aileen's friend; and 
she was glad to see her rule hearts and wean the attention of 
men from smoking pot-pie and lemon meringue. But deep 
below our freckles and hay-colored hair the unhandsomest of 
us dream of a prince or a princess, not vicarious, but coming 
to us alone. 

There was a morning when Aileen tripped in to work with 
a slightly bruised eye; and Tildy 's solicitude was almost 
enough to heal any optic. 

"Fresh guy," explained Aileen, "last night as I was going 
home at Twenty-third and Sixth. Sashayed up, so he did, 
and made a break. I turned him down, cold, and he made a 
sneak; but followed me down to Eighteenth, and tried his hot 
air again. Gee! but I slapped him a good one, side of the 
face. Then he give me that eye. Does it look real awful, 
Til.'^ I should hate that Mr. Nicholson should see it when he 
comes in for his tea and toast at ten." 

Tildy listened to the adventure with breathless admiration. 
No man had ever tried to follow her. She was safe abroad 
at any hour of the twenty-four. What bliss it must have 



54 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

been to have had a man follow one and black one's eye for 
love! 

Among the customers at Bogle's was a young man named 
Seeders, who worked in a laundry office. Mr. Seeders was 
thin and had hght hair, and appeared to have been recently 
rough-dried and starched. He was too diffident to aspire to 
Aileen's notice; so he usually sat at one of Tildy's tables, 
where he devoted himself to silence and boiled weakfish. 

One day when Mr. Seeders came in to dinner he had been 
drinking beer. There were only two or three customers in 
the restaurant. TMien Mr. Seeders had finished his weakfish 
he got up, put his arm around Tildy's waist, kissed her loudly 
and impudently, walked out upon the street, snapped his 
fingers in the direction of the laundry, and hied himself to 
play pennies in the slot machines at the Amusement Arcade. 

For a few moments Tildy stood petrified. Then she was 
aware of Aileen shaking at her an arch fore-finger, and saying : 

"Why, Til, you naughty girl! Ain't you getting to be 
a-^^ful, Miss Slyboots ! First thing I know you'll be stealing 
some of my fellows. I must keep an eye on you, my lady." 

Another thing dawned upon Tildy's recovering wits. In 
a moment she had advanced from a hopeless, lowly admirer 
to be an Eve-sister of the potent Aileen. She herself was now 
a man-charmer, a mark for Cupid, a Sabine who must be coy 
when the Romans were at their banquet boards. Man had 
found her waist achievable and her lips desirable. The sud- 
den and amatory Seeders had, as it were, performed for her a 
miraculous piece of one-day laundry vvork. He had taken 
the sackcloth of her uncomeliness, had washed, dried, 
starched and ironed it, and returned it to her sheer em- 
broidered lawn — the robe of Venus herself. 

The freckles in Tildy's cheeks merged into a rosy flush. 
Now both Circe and Psyche peeped from her brightened eyes. 
Not even Aileen herself had been publicly embraced and 
kissed in the restaurant. 

Tildy could not keep the delightful secret. When trade 
was slack she went and stood at Bogle's desk. Her eyes 



THE BRIEF DEBUT OF TILDY 55 

were shining; she tried not to let her words sound proud and 
boastful. 

"A gentleman insulted me to-day," she said. "He hugged 
me around the waist and kissed me." 

"That so.?" said Bogle, cracking open his business armor. 
"After this week you get a dollar a week more." 

At the next regular meal when Tildy set food before 
customers with whom she had acquaintance she said to 
each of them modestly, as one whose merit needed no bol- 
stering: 

"A gentleman insulted me to-day in the restaurant. He 
put his arm around my waist and kissed me." 

The diners accepted the revelation in various ways — some 
incredulously, some with congratulations; others turned 
upon her the stream of badinage that had hitherto been 
directed at Aileen alone. And Tildy's heart swelled in her 
bosom, for she saw at last the towers of Romance rise above 
the horizon of the gray plain in which she had for so long 
traveled. 

For two days Mr. Seeders came not again. During that 
time Tildy established herself firmly as a woman to be wooed. 
She bought ribbons, and arranged her hair like Aileen's, and 
tightened her waist two inches. She had a thrilling but 
delightful fear that Mr. Seeders would rush in suddenly and 
shoot her with a pistol. He must have loved her desperately; 
and impulsive lovers are always blindly jealous. 

Even Aileen had not been shot at with a pistol. And then 
Tildy rather hoped that he would not shoot at her, for she 
was always loyal to Aileen; and she did not want to over- 
shadow her friend. 

At 4 o'clock on the afternoon of the third day Mr. Seeders 
came in. There were no customers at the tables. At the 
back end of the restaurant Tildy was refilling the mustard 
pots and Aileen was quartering pies. Mr. Seeders walked 
back to where they stood. 

Tildy looked up and saw him, gasped, and pressed the 
mustard spoon against her heart. A red hair bow was in her 



56 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

hair; she wore Venus's Eighth Avenue badge, the blue bead 
necklace with the swinging silver symbolic heart. 

Mr. Seeders was flushed and embarrassed. He plunged 
one hand into his hip pocket and the other into a fresh 
pumpkin pie. 

"Miss Tildy," said he, "I want to apologize for what I 
done the other evenin'. Tell you the truth, I was pretty well 
tanked up or I wouldn't of done it. I wouldn't do no lady 
that a-way when I was sober. So I hope, Miss Tildy, you'll 
accept my 'pology, and believe that I wouldn't of done it if 
I'd known what I was doin' and hadn't of been drunk." 

With this handsome plea Mr. Seeders backed away, and 
departed, feeling that reparation had been made. 

But behind the convenient screen Tildy had thrown herself 
flat upon a table among the butter chips and the coffee cups, 
and was sobbing her heart out — out and back again to the 
gray plain wherein travel they with blunt noses and hay- 
colored hair. From her knot she had torn the red hair bow 
and cast it upon the floor. Seeders she despised utterly; she 
had but taken his kiss as that of a pioneer and prophetic 
prince who might have set the clocks going and the pages to 
running in fairyland. But the kiss had been maudlin and 
unmeant; the court had not stirred at the false alarm; she 
must forevermore remain the Sleeping Beauty. 

Yet not all was lost. Aileen's arm was around her; and 
Tildy 's red hand groped among the butter chips till it found 
the warm clasp of her friend's. 

"Don't you fret. Til," said Aileen, who did not understand 
entirely. "That turnip-faced little clothespin of a Seeders 
ain't worth it. He ain't anything of a gentleman or he 
wouldn't ever of apologized." 



A LICKPENNY LOVER 

From The Voice of the City. First published in The World, May 
29, 1904. Few reviews of O. Henry fail to acclaim him as "The 
little shop-girl's knight unto the end." "The reforms that I 
attempted m behalf of the shop-girls of New York," said Colonel 
Roosevelt, "were suggested by the stories of O. Henry." The more 
notable of these stories in the order of their publication are: A Lick- 
penny Lover, An Unfinished Story, Elsie in New York, Brickdust Row, 
and The Trimmed Lamp. There is less reform purpose, however, in 
A Lickpenny Lover than m any of the others, but the art is consum- 
mate. Coney Island may so dominate the working girl's imagi- 
nation as to make her mistake the sham for the real, the imitation 
for the original, the sjTnbol for the thing symbolized — m some such 
thought the germ of the story is probably to be found. Masie's 
vocabulary had become narrowed, not in the number of words but 
in their connotation. All of us are Masies more or less when we 
read Saint John, Dante, Shakespeare, Goethe, or Browning. We 
understand the words but the reach and altitude of the ideas are 
bounded by the reach and altitude of our own experience. 

There were 3,000 girls in the Biggest Store. Masie was 
one of them. She was eighteen and a saleslady in the gents' 
gloves. Here she became versed in two varieties of human 
beings — the kind of gents who buy their gloves in department 
stores and the kind of women who buy gloves for unfortunate 
gents. Besides this wide knowledge of the human species, 
Masie had acquired other information. She had listened to 
the proniulgated wisdom of the 2,999 other girls and had 
stored it in a brain that was as secretive and wary as that of a 
Maltese cat. Perhaps nature, foreseeing that she would lack 
wise counsellors, had mingled the saving ingredient of shrewd- 
ness along with her beauty, as she has endowed the silver fox 
of the priceless fur above the other animals with cunning. 

57 



58 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

For Masie was beautiful. She was a deep-tinted blonde, 
with the calm poise of a lady who cooks butter cakes in a 
window. She stood behind her counter in the Biggest Store; 
and as you closed your hand over the tape-line for your 
glove measure you thought of Hebe; and as you looked again 
you wondered how she had come by Minerva's eyes. 

When the floorwalker was not looking Masie chewed tutti 
frutti; when he was looking she gazed up as if at the clouds 
and smiled wistfully. 

That is the shop-girl smile, and I enjoin you to shun it unless 
you are well fortified with callosity of the heart, caramels, and 
a congeniality for the capers of Cupid. This smile belonged 
to Masie's recreation hours and not to the store; but the floor- 
walker must have his own. He is the Shylock of the stores. 
WTien he comes nosing around, the bridge of his nose is a toll- 
bridge. It is goo-goo eyes or "git" when he looks toward a 
pretty girl. Of course not all floorwalkers are thus. Only a 
few days ago the papers printed news of one over eighty years 
of age. 

One day Irving Carter, painter, millionaire, traveler, poet, 
automobilist, happened to enter the Biggest Store. It is due 
to him to add that his visit was not voluntary. Filial duty 
took him by the collar and dragged him inside, while his 
mother philandered among the bronze and terra-cotta 
statuettes. 

Carter strolled across to the glove counter in order to shoot 
a few minutes on the wing. His need for gloves was genuine; 
he had forgotten to bring a pair with him. But his action 
hardly calls for apology, because he had never heard of glove- 
counter flirtations. 

As he neared the vicinity of his fate he hesitated, suddenly 
conscious of this unknown phase of Cupid's less worthy 
profession. 

Three or four cheap fellows, sonorously garbed, were lean- 
ing over the counters, wrestling with the mediatorial hand- 
coverings, while giggling girls played vivacious seconds to 
their lead upon the strident string of coquetry. Carter would 



A LICKPENNY LOVER 59 

have retreated, but he had gone too far. Masie confronted 
him behind her counter with a questioning look in eyes as 
coldly, beautifully, warmly blue as the glint of summer sun- 
shine on an iceberg drifting in Southern seas. 

And then Irving Carter, painter, millionaire, etc., felt a 
warm flush rise to his aristocratically pale face. But not 
from diffidence. The blush was intellectual in origin. He 
knew in a moment that he stood in the ranks of the ready- 
made youths who wooed the giggling girls at other counters. 
Himself leaned against the oaken trysting place of a cockney 
Cupid with a desire in his heart for the favor of a glove sales- 
girl. He was no more than Bill and Jack and Mickey. And 
then he felt a sudden tolerance for them, and an elating, 
courageous contempt for the conventions upon which he had 
fed, and an unhesitating determination to have this perfect 
creature for his own. 

When the gloves were paid for and wrapped Carter lingered 
for a moment. The dimples at the corners of Masie's dam- 
ask mouth deepened. All gentlemen w^ho bought gloves lin- 
gered in just that way. She curved an arm, showing like 
Psyche's through her shirt-waist sleeve, and rested an elbow 
upon the show-case edge. 

Carter had never before encountered a situation of which 
he had not been perfect master. But now he stood far more 
awkward than Bill or Jack or Mickey. He had no chance 
of meeting this beautiful girl socially. His mind struggled to 
recall the nature and habits of shop-girls as he had read or 
heard of them. Somehow he had received the idea that they 
sometimes did not insist too strictly upon the regular channels 
of introduction. His heart beat loudly at the thought of 
proposing an unconventional meeting with this lovely and 
virginal being. But the tumult in his heart gave him cour- 
age. 

After a few friendly and well-received remarks on general 
subjects, he laid his card by her hand on the counter. 

"Will you please pardon me," he said, "if I seem too bold; 
but I earnestly hope you will allow me the pleasure of seeing 



60 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

you again. There is my name; I assure you that it is with 
the greatest respect that I ask the favor of becoming one of 
your fr acquaintances. May I not hope for the privi- 
lege?" 

Masie knew men — especially men who buy gloves. With- 
out hesitation she looked him frankly and smilingly in the 
eyes, and said: 

"Sure. I guess you're all right. I don't usually go out 
with strange gentlemen, though. It ain't quite ladylike. 
When should you want to see me again .^" 

"As soon as I may," said Carter. "If you would allow me 
to call at your home, I " 

Masie laughed musically. "Oh, gee, no!" she said, em- 
phatically. " If you could see our flat once ! There's five of 
us in three rooms. I'd just like to see ma's face if I w^as to 
bring a gentleman friend there!" 

"Anywhere, then," said the enamored Carter, "that will 
be convenient to you." 

"Say," suggested Masie, with a bright-idea look in her 
peach-blow face; "I guess Thursday night will about suit me. 
Suppose you come to the corner of Eighth Avenue and Forty- 
eighth Street at 7 :30. I hve right near the corner. But I've 
got to be back home by eleven. Ma never lets me stay out 
after eleven." 

Carter promised gratefully to keep the tryst, and then 
hastened to his mother, who was looking about for him to 
ratify her purchase of a bronze Diana. 

A salesgirl, with small eyes and an obtuse nose, strolled 
near Masie, with a friendly leer. 

"Did you make a hit with his nobs, Masie.^" she asked, 
familiarly. 

"The gentleman asked permission to call," answered 
Masie, with the grand air, as she slipped Carter's card into 
the bosom of her waist. 

"Permission to call!" echoed small eyes, with a snigger. 
"Did he say anything about dinner in the Waldorf and a 
spin in his auto afterward .f*" 



A LICKPENNY LOVER 61 

''*0h, cheese it!" said Masie, wearily. "You've been used 
to swell things, I don't think. You've had a swelled head 
ever since that hose-cart driver took you out to a chop suey 
joint. No, he never mentioned the Waldorf; but there's a 
Fifth Avenue address on his card, and if he buys the supper 
you can bet your life there won't be no pigtail on the waiter 
what takes the order." 

As Carter glided away from the Biggest Store with his 
mother in his electric runabout, he bit his lip with a dull pain 
at his heart. He knew that love had come to him for the 
first time in all the twenty-nine years of his life. And that 
the object of it should make so readily an appointment with 
him at a street corner, though it was a step toward his desires, 
tortured him with misgivings. 

Carter did not know the shop-girl. He did not know that 
her home is often either a scarcely habitable tiny room or a 
domicile filled to overflowing with kith and kin. The street- 
corner is her parlor; the park is her drawing-room; the avenue 
is her garden walk; yet for the most part she is as inviolate 
mistress of herself in them as is my lady inside her tapestried 
chamber. 

One evening at dusk, two weeks after their first meeting. 
Carter and Masie strolled arm-in-arm into a little, dimly-lit 
park. They found a bench, tree-shadowed and secluded, and 
sat there. 

For the first time his arm stole gently around her. Her 
golden-bronze head slid restfully against his shoulder. 

"Gee!" sighed Masie, thankfully. "Why didn't you ever 
think of that before.^" 

"Masie," said Carter, earnestly, "yo^ surely know that 
I love you. I ask you sincerely to marry me. You know me 
well enough by this time to have no doubts of me. I want 
you, and I must have you. I care nothing for the difference 
in our stations." 

"What is the difference.'^" asked Masie, curiously. 

"Well, there isn't any," said Carter, quickly, "except in 
the minds of foolish people. It is in my power to give you a 



62 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

life of luxury. My social position is beyond dispute, and my 
means are ample." 

"They all say that," remarked Masie. "It's the kid they 
aU give you. I suppose you really work in a delicatessen or 
follow the races. I ain't as green as I look." 

"I can furnish you aU the proofs you want," said Carter, 
gently. "And I want you, Masie. I loved you the first day 
I saw you." 

"They all do," said Masie, with an amused laugh, "to hear 
'em talk. If I could meet a man that got stuck on me the 
third time he'd seen me I think I'd get mashed on him." 

"Please don't say such things," pleaded Carter. "Listen 
to me, dear. Ever since I first looked into your eyes you 
have been the only woman in the world for me." 

"Oh, ain't you the kidder!" smiled Masie. "How many 
other girls did you ever teU that-f^" 

But Carter persisted. And at length he reached the 
flimsy, fluttering little soul of the shop-girl that existed some- 
where deep down in her lovely bosom. His words penetrated 
the heart whose very lightness was its safest armor. She 
looked up at him with eyes that saw. And a warm glow 
visited her cool cheeks. Tremblingly, a^-fully, her moth 
w^ngs closed, and she seemed about to settle upon the flower 
of love. Some faint glimmer of life and its possibilities on the 
other side of her glove counter dawned upon her. Carter 
felt the change and crowded the opportunity. 

"Marry me, Masie," he whispered softly, "and we will go 
away from this ugly city to beautiful ones. We will forget 
work and business, and life will be one long holiday. I know 
where I should take you — I have been there often. Just 
think of a shore where summer is eternal, where the waves 
are always rippling on the lovely beach and the people are 
happy and free as children. We will sail to those shores and 
remain there as long as you please. In one of those far-away 
cities there are grand and lovely palaces and towers full of 
beautiful pictures and statues. The streets of the city are 
water^ and one travels about in " 



A LICKPENNY LOVER 63 

"I know," said Masie, sitting up suddenly. "Gondolas." 

"Yes," smiled Carter. 

"I thought so," said Masie. 

"And then," continued Carter, "we will travel on and see 
whatever we wish in the world. After the European cities 
we will visit India and the ancient cities there, and ride on 
elephants and see the wonderful temples of the Hindoos and 
Brahmins and the Japanese gardens and the camel trains and 
chariot races in Persia, and all the queer sights of foreign 
countries. Don't you think you would like it, Masie.^^" 

Masie rose to her feet. 

"I think we had better be going home," she said, coolly. 
"It's getting late." 

Carter humored her. He had come to know her varying, 
thistle-down moods, and that it was useless to combat them. 
But he felt a certain happy triumph. He had held for a 
moment, though but by a silken thread, the soul of his wild 
Psyche, and hope was stronger within him. Once she had 
folded her wings and her cool hand had closed about his o^\ti. 

At the Biggest Store the next day Masie's chum, Lulu, way- 
laid her in an angle of the counter. 

"How are you and your swell friend making it?" she asked. 

"Oh, him?" said Masie, patting her side curls. "He ain't 
in it any more. Say, Lu, what do you think that fellow 
wanted me to do?" 

"Go on the stage?" guessed Lulu, breathlessly. 

"Nit; he's too cheap a guy for that. He wanted me to 
marry him and go down to Coney Island for a wedding tour ! " 



THE PENDULUM 

From The Trimmed Lamp. First published in The World, June 
12, 1904. Habit, especially the alternation of resolve and relapse, 
furnished O. Henry with rich story material. He first approached 
the theme in The Passing of Black Eagle (March, 1902), which was 
quickly followed by Round the Circle (see Waifs and Strays, pages 
17-24), the latter being little more than a first draft of The Pendu- 
lum. Then followed A Comedy in Rubber, From the Cabby's Seat, 
The Girl and the Habit, and The Harbinger (March 18, 1906). His 
text in The Girl and the Habit is from the dictionary: "Habit — a 
tendency or aptitude acquired by custom or frequent repetition." 
In The Harbinger he hails habit as "the power that keeps the earth 
from flying to pieces, though there is some silly theory of gravi- 
tation." "Habit," says William James in his great chapter on the 
subject, "is thus the enormous fly-wheel of society, its most precious 
conservative agent. It alone is what keeps us all within the bounds 
of ordinance." Read also Maupassant's stoiy called An Artist and 
Armistead Churchill Gordon's Baytop (in Omviirandy, Scribners, 
1917). The latter is a happy illustration of Professor James's re- 
mark about habit in animals: "Riderless cavalry-horses, at many a 
battle, have been seen to come together and go through their custom- 
ary evolutions at the sound of the bugle-call." 

"Eighty-First Street — let 'em out, please," yelled the 
shepherd in blue. 

A flock of citizen sheep scrambled out and another flock 
scrambled aboard. Ding-ding! The cattle cars of the 
Manhattan Elevated rattled away, and John Perkins drifted 
down the stairway of the station with the released flock. 

John walked slowly toward his flat. Slowly, because in 
the lexicon of his daily life there was no such word as "per- 
haps." There are no surprises awaiting a man who has been 
married two years and lives in a flat. As he walked John 

64 



THE PENDULUM 65 

Per'kins prophesied to himself with gloomy and downtrodden 
cynicism the foregone conclusions of the monotonous day. 

Katy would meet him at the door with a kiss flavored with 
cold cream and butter-scotch. He would remove his coat, 
sit upon a macadamized lounge, and read, in the evening 
paper, of Russians and Japs slaughtered by the deadly lino- 
type. For dinner there would be pot roast, a salad flavored 
with a dressing warranted not to crack or injure the leather, 
stewed rhubarb, and the bottle of strawberry marmalade 
blushing at the certificate of chemical purity on its label. 
After dinner Katy would show him the new patch in her crazy 
quilt that the iceman had cut for her off the end of his four-in- 
hand. At half -past seven they would spread newspapers 
over the furniture to catch the pieces of plastering that fell 
when the fat man in the flat overhead began to take his 
physical culture exercises. Exactly at eight Hickey & Moo- 
ney, of the vaudeville team (unbooked) in the flat across the 
hall, would yield to the gentle influence of delirium tremens 
and begin to overturn chairs under the delusion that 
Hammerstein was pursuing them with a five-hundred-dollar- 
a-week contract. Then the gent at the window across the 
air-shaft would get out his flute; the nightly gas leak would 
steal forth to frolic in the highways; the dumbwaiter would 
slip off its trolley; the janitor would drive Mrs. Zanowitski's 
five children once more across the Yalu; the lady with the 
champagne shoes and the Skye terrier would trip downstairs 
and paste her Thursday name over her bell and letter-box — 
and the evening routme of the Frogmore flats would be under 
way. 

John Perkins knew these things would happen. And he 
knew that at a quarter past eight he would summon his nerve 
and reach for his hat, and that his wife would deliver this 
speech in a querulous tone: 

"Now, where are you going, I'd like to know, John Per- 
kins?" 

"Thought I'd drop up to McCloskey's," he would answer, 
"and play a game or two of pool with the fellows." 



66 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

Of late such had been John Perkins's habit. At ten or 
eleven he would return. Sometimes Katy would be asleep; 
sometimes waiting up, ready to melt in the crucible of her ire 
a little more gold plating from the \^Tought steel chains of 
matrimony. For these things Cupid will have to answer 
when he stands at the bar of justice with his victims from the 
Frogmore flats. 

To-night John Perkins encountered a tremendous upheaval 
of the commonplace when he reached his door. No Katy 
was there with her affectionate, confectionate kiss. The 
three rooms seemed in portentous disorder. All about lay 
her things in confusion. Shoes in the middle of the floor, 
curling tongs, hair bows, kimonos, powder box, jumbled 
together on dresser and chairs — this was not Xaty's way. 
With a sinking heart John saw the comb with a curling cloud 
of her brown hair among its teeth. Some unusual hurry and 
perturbation must have possessed her, for she always care- 
fully placed these combings in the little blue vase on the 
mantel to be some day formed into the coveted feminine 
"rat." 

Hanging conspicuously to the gas jet by a string was a 
folded paper. John seized it. It was a note from his wife 
running thus: 

''Dear John: I just had a telegram saying mother is very 
sick, I am going to take the 4-30 train. Brother Sam is going 
to meet me at the depot there. There is cold mutton in the ice box. 
I hope it isn't her quinzy again. Pay the milkman 50 cents. 
She had it bad last spring. DonH forget to write to the company 
about the gas meter, and your good socks are in the top drawer. 
I will write to-morrow. 

Hastily, katy:' 

Never during their two years of matrimony had he and 
Katy been separated for a night. John read the note over 
and over in a dumbfounded way. Here was a break in a 
routine that had never varied, and it left him dazed. 



THE PENDULUM 67 

There on the back of a chair hung, pathetically empty and 
formless, the red wrapper with black dots that she always 
wore while getting the meals. Her week-day clothes had 
been tossed here and there in her haste. A little paper bag of 
her favorite butter-scotch lay with its string yet unwound. 
A daily paper sprawled on the floor, gaping rectangularly 
where a railroad time-table had been clipped from it. Every- 
thing in the room spoke of a loss, of an essence gone, of its soul 
and life departed. John Perkins stood among the dead re- 
mains with a queer feeling of desolation in his heart. 

He began to set the rooms tidy as well as he could. When 
he touched her clothes a thrill of something like terror went 
through him. He had never thought what existence would 
be without Katy. She had become so thoroughly annealed 
into his life that she was like the air he breathed — necessary 
but scarcely noticed. Now, without warning, she was gone, 
vanished, as completely absent as if she had never existed. 
Of course it would be only for a few days, or at most a week 
or two, but it seemed to him as if the very hand of death had 
pointed a finger at his secure and uneventful home. 

John dragged the cold mutton from the ice-box, made 
coffee, and sat down to a lonely meal face to face with the 
strawberry marmalade's shameless certificate of purity. 
Bright among withdrawn blessings now appeared to him the 
ghosts of pot roasts and the salad with tan polish dressing. 
His home was dismantled. A quinzied mother-in-law had 
knocked his lares and penates sky-high. After his solitary 
meal John sat at a front window. 

He did not care to smoke. Outside the city roared to him 
to come join in its dance of folly and pleasure. The night 
was his. He might go forth unquestioned and thrum the 
strings of jollity as free as any gay bachelor there. He might 
carouse and wander and have his fling until dawn if he liked; 
and there would be no wrathful Katy waiting for him, bearing 
the chalice that held the dregs of his joy. He might play 
pool at McCloskey's with his roistering friends until Aurora 
dimmed the electric bulbs if he chose. The hymeneal strings 



68 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

that had curbed him always when the Frogmore flats had 
palled upon him were loosened. Katy was gone. 

John Perkins was not accustomed to analyzing his 
emotions. But as he sat in his Katy-bereft 10x12 parlor 
he hit unerringly upon the keynote of his discomfort. He 
knew now that Katy was necessary to his happiness. His 
feeling for her, lulled into unconsciousness by the dull round 
of domesticity, had been sharply stirred by the loss of her 
presence. Has it not been dinned into us by proverb and 
sermon and fable that we never prize the music till the sweet- 
voiced bird has flown — or in other no less florid and true 
utterances? 

*'I'm a double-dyed dub," mused John Perkins, "the way 
I've been treating Katy. Off every night playing pool and 
bumming with the boys instead of staying home with her. 
The poor girl here all alone with nothing to amuse her, and 
me acting that way ! John Perkins, you're the worst kind of 
a shine. I'm going to make it up for the little girl. I'll take 
her out and let her see some amusement. And I'll cut out 
the McCloskey gang right from this minute." 

Yes, there was the city roaring outside for John Perkins to 
come dance in the train of Momus. And at McCloskey 's the 
boys were knocking the balls idly into the pockets against the 
hour for the nightly game. But no primrose w^ay nor clicking 
cue could woo the remorseful soul of Perkins the bereft. The 
thing that was his, lightly held and half scorned, had been 
taken away from him, and he wanted it. Backward to a 
certain man named Adam, whom the cherubim bounced 
from the orchard, could Perkins, the remors/eful, trace his 
descent. 

Near the right hand of John Perkins stood a chair. On the 
back of it stood Katy's blue shirtwaist. It still retained 
something of her contour. Midway of the sleeves were fine, 
individual wrinkles made by the movements of her arms in 
working for his comfort and pleasure. A delicate but im- 
pelling odor of blue-bells came from it. John took it and 
looked long and soberly at the unresponsive grenadine 
