"Fill glasses," he said, when it was brought. He stood up 
at the head of the table in the candlelight, a black mountain 
of venom and conceit, with something like the memory of an 
old love turned to poison in his eye, as it fell upon his niece. 

"Monsieur Mignot," he said, raising his wineglass, "drink 
after I say this to you : You have taken to be your wife one 
who will make your life a foul and wretched thing. The 
blood in her is an inheritance running black lies and red ruin. 
She will bring you shame and anxiety. The devil that de- 
scended to her is there in her eyes and skin and mouth that 
stoop even to beguile a peasant. There is your promise, mon- 
sieur poet, for a happy life. Drink your wine. At last, 
mademoiselle, I am rid of you." 

The marquis drank. A little grievous cry, as if from a 
sudden wound, came from the girl's lips. David, with his 
glass in his hand, stepped forward three paces and faced the 
marquis. There was little of a shepherd in his bearing. 

"Just now," he said, calmly, "you did me the honor to 
^all me 'monsieur.' May I hope, therefore, that my marriage 
to mademoiselle has placed me somewhat nearer to you in — • 
let us say, reflected rank — ^has given me the right to stand 
more as an equal to monseigneur in a certain little piece o* 
business I have in my mind.f^" 

"You may hope, shepherd," sneered the marquis. 

"Then," said David, dashing his glass of wine into the 
contemptuous eyes that mocked him, "perhaps you will con- 
descend to fight me." 

The fury of the great lord outbroke in one sudden curse 
like a blast from a horn. He tore his sword from its black 
sheath; he called to the hovering landlord: "A sword there, 
for this lout!" He turned to the lady, with a laugh that 
chilled her heart, and said: "You put much labor upon me, 
madame. It seems I must find you a husband and make you 
a widow in the same night.'* 

"I know not sword-play," said David. He flushed to 
make the confession before his lady. 

" *I know not sword-play, ' " mimicked the marquis. "Shall 



24 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

we fight like peasants with oaken cudgels? Hola ! Frangoisj 
my pistols!" 

A postilion brought two shining great pistols ornamented 
with carven silver, from the carriage holsters. The marquis 
tossed one upon the table near David's hand. "To the other 
end of the table," he cried; "even a shepherd may pull a 
trigger. Few of them attain the honor to die by the weapon 
of a De Beaupertuys." 

The shepherd and the marquis faced each other from the 
ends of the long table. The landlord, in an ague of terror, 
clutched the air and stammered: "M-M-Monseigneur, for 
the love of Christ! not in my house! — do not spill blood — it 
will ruin my custom " The look of the marquis, threaten- 
ing him, paralyzed his tongue. 

"Coward," cried the lord of Beaupertuys, "cease chattering 
your teeth long enough to give the word for us, if you can." 

Mine host's knees smote the floor. He was without a vo- 
cabulary. Even sounds were beyond him. Still, by gestures 
he seemed to beseech peace in the name of his house and 
custom. 

" I will give the word," said the lady, in a clear voice. She 
went up to David and kissed him sweetly. Her eyes w^ere 
sparkling bright, and color had come to her cheek. She stood 
against the wall, and the two men leveled their pistols for her 
count. 

" Un — deux — trois .'" 

The tW'O reports came so nearly together that the candles 
■flickered but once. The marquis stood, smiling, the fingers 
of his left hand resting, outspread, upon the end of the table. 
David remained erect, and turned his head very slowly, 
searching for his wife with his eyes. Then, as a garment falls 
from where it is hung, he sank, crumpled, upon the floor. 

With a little cry of terror and despair, the widowed maid 
ran and stooped above him. She found his wound, and then 
looked up with her old look of pale melancholy. "Through 
his heart," she whispered. "Oh, his heart!" 

"Come, " boomed the great voice of the marquis, "out with 



ROADS OF DESTINY 25 

you to the carriage! Daybreak shall not find you on my 
hands. Wed you shall be again, and to a living husband, 
this night. The next we come upon, my lady, highwayman 
or peasant. If the road yields no other, then the churl that 
opens my gates. Out with you to the carriage!" 

The marquis, implacable and huge, the lady wrapped again 
in the mystery of her cloak, the postilion bearing the weapons 
— all moved out to the waiting carriage. The sound of its 
ponderous wheels rolling away echoed through the slumbering 
village. In the hall of the Silver Flagon the distracted land- 
lord wrung his hands above the slain poet's body, while the 
flames of the four and twenty candles danced and flickered 
on the table. 

THE RIGHT BRANCH 

Three leagues, then, the road ran, and turned into a puzzle. 
It joined with another and a larger road at right angles. David 
stood, uncertain, for a while, and then took the road to the right. 

Whither it led he knew not, but he was resolved to leave 
Vernoy far behind that night. He traveled a league and 
then passed a large chateau which showed testimony of recent 
entertainment. Lights shone from every window; from the 
great stone gateway ran a tracery of wheel tracks drawn in 
the dust by the vehicles of the guests. 

Three leagues farther and David was weary. He rested 
and slept for a while on a bed of pine boughs at the roadside. 
Then up and on again along the unknown way. 

Thus for five days he traveled the great road, sleeping 
upon Nature's balsamic beds or in peasants' ricks, eating of 
their black, hospitable bread, drinking from streams or the 
willing cup of the goatherd. 

At length he crossed a great bridge and set his foot within 
the smiling city that has crushed or crowned more poets than 
all the rest of the world. His breath came quickly as Paris 
sang to him in a little undertone her vital chant of greeting — ■ 
the hum of voice and foot and wheel. 

High up under the eaves of an old house in the Rue Conti. 



26 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

David paid for lodging, and set himself, in a wooden chairj 
to his poems. The street, once sheltering citizens of import 
and consequence, was now given over to those who ever follow 
in the wake of decline. 

The houses were tall and still possessed of a ruined dignity, 
but many of them were empty save for dust and the spider. 
By night there was the clash of steel and the cries of brawlers 
straying restlessly from inn to inn. Where once gentility 
abode was now but a rancid and rude incontinence. But 
here David found housing commensurate to his scant purse. 
Daylight and candlelight found him at pen and paper. 

One afternoon he was returning from a foraging trip to 
the lower world, with bread and curds and a bottle of thin 
wine. Halfway up his dark stairway he met — or rather 
came upon, for she rested on the stair — a young woman of a 
beauty that should balk even the justice of a poet's imagina- 
tion. A loose, dark cloak, flung open, showed a rich gown 
beneath. Her eyes changed swiftly with every little shade 
of thought. Within one moment they would be round and 
artless like a child's, and long and cozening like a gipsy's 
One hand raised her gown, undraping a little shoe, high-heeled 
with its ribbons dangling, untied. So heavenly she was, so 
unfitted to stoop, so qualified to charm and command ! Per' 
haps she had seen David coming, and had waited for his 
help there. 

Ah, would monsieur pardon that she occupied the stairway, 
but the shoe ! — the naughty shoe ! Alas ! it would not remain 
tied. Ah! if monsieur would be so gracious! 

The poet's fingers trembled as he tied the contrary ribbons. 
Then he would have fled from the danger of her presence, 
but the eyes grew long and cozening, like a gipsy's, and 
held him. He leaned against the balustrade, clutching his 
bottle of sour wine. 

"You have been so good," she said, smiling. "Does mon 
sieur, perhaps, five in the house.'*" 

*'Yes, madame. I — I think so, madame." 

''Perhaps in the third story, then?'* 



ROADS OF DESTINY 27 

"No, madame; higher up." 

The lady fluttered her fingers with the least possible ges« 
ture of impatience. 

"Pardon. Certainly I am not discreet in asking. Mon- 
sieur will forgive me ? It is surely not becoming that I should 
inquire where he lodges." 

"Madame, do not say so. I live in the " 

"No, no, no; do not tell me. Now I see that I erred. But 
I cannot lose the interest I feel in this house and all that is 
in it. Once it was my home. Often I come here but to 
dream of those happy days again. Will you let that be my 



-excuse: 



"Let me tell you, then, for you need no excuse, stam- 
mered the poet. "I live in the top floor — the small room 
where the stairs turn." 

"In the front room.^" asked the lady, turning her head 
sidewise. 

"The rear, madame." 

The lady sighed, as if with relief. 

"I will detain you no longer, then, monsieur," she said, 
employing the round and artless eye. "Take good care of 
my house. Alas! only the memories of it are mine now. 
Adieu, and accept my thanks for your courtesy." 

She was gone, leaving but a smile and a trace of sweet 
perfume. David climbed the stairs as one in slumber. But 
he awoke from it, and the smile and the perfume lingered 
with him and never afterward did either seem quite to leave 
him. This lady of whom he knew nothing drove him to lyrics 
of eyes, chansons of swiftly conceived love, odes to curling 
hair, and sonnets to shppers on slender feet. 

Poet he must have been, for Yvonne was forgotten; this 
fine, new loveliness held him with its freshness and grace. 
The subtle perfume about her filled him with strange emo- 
tions. 

On a certain night three persons were gathered about a 
table in a room on the third floor of the same house. Three 



28 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

chairs and the table and a Hghted candle upon it was all the 
furniture. One of the persons was a huge man, dressed in 
black. His expression was one of sneering pride. The ends 
of his upturned moustache reached nearly to his mocking 
eyes. Another was a lady, young and beautiful, with eyes 
that could be round and artless, like a child's, or long and 
cozening, like a gipsy's, but were now keen and ambitious, like 
any other conspirator's. The third was a man of action, a 
combatant, a bold and impatient executive, breathing fire 
and steel. He was addressed by the others as Captain 
Desrolles. 

This man struck the table with his fist, and said, with con- 
trolled violence: 

"To-night. To-night as he goes to midnight mass. I am 
tired of the plotting that gets nowhere. I am sick of signals 
and ciphers and secret meetings and such haragouin. Let us 
be honest traitors. If France is to be rid of him, let us kill 
in the open, and not hunt with snares and traps. To-night, 
I say. I back my words. My hand will do the deed. To- 
night, as he goes to mass." 

The lady turned upon him a cordial look. Woman, how- 
ever wedded to plots, must ever thus bow to rash courage. 
The big man stroked his upturned moustache. 

"Dear captain," he said, in a great voice, softened by habit, 
"this time I agree with you. Nothing is to be gained by 
waiting. Enough of the palace guards belong to us to make 
the endeavor a safe one." 

"To-night," repeated Captain Desrolles, again striking the 
table. "You have heard me, marquis; my hand will do the 
deed." 

"But now," said the huge man, softly, "comes a question. 
Word must be sent to our partisans in the palace, and a signal 
agreed upon. Our stanchest men must accompany the royal 
carriage. At this hour what messenger can penetrate so far 
as the south doorway.^ Ribout is stationed there; once a mes- 
sage is placed in his hands, all will go well/' 

"I will send the message," said the lady. 

