104 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

Soapy moves uneasily on his bench in the park, you may 
know that winter is near at hand. 

A dead leaf fell in Soapy 's lap. That was Jack Frost's 
card. Jack is kind to the regular denizens of Madison Square 
and gives fair w^arning of his annual call. At the corners of 
four streets he hands his pasteboard to the North Wind, 
footman of the mansion of All Outdoors, so that the inhabit- 
ants thereof may make ready. 

Soapy 's mind became cognizant of the fact that the time 
had come for him to resolve himself into a singular Com- 
mittee of Ways and Means to provide against the coming 
rigor. And therefore he moved uneasily on his bench. 

The hibernatorial ambitions of Soapy were not of the 
highest. In them there were no considerations of Mediter- 
ranean cruises, of soporific Southern skies, or drifting in the 
Vesuvian Bay. Three months on the Island was what his 
soul craved. Three months of assured board and bed and 
congenial company, safe from Boreas and bluecoats, seemed 
to Soapy the essence of things desirable. 

For years the hospitable Blackwell's had been his winter 
quarters. Just as his more fortunate fellow New Yorkers 
had bought their tickets to Palm Beach and the Riviera each 
winter, so Soapy had made his humble arrangements for his 
annual hegira to the Island. And now the time was come. 
On the previous night three Sabbath new^spapers, distributed 
beneath his coat, about his ankles, and over his lap, had failed 
to repulse the cold as he slept on his bench near the spurting 
fountain in the ancient square. So the Island loomed big 
and timely in Soapy 's mind. He scorned the provisions 
made in the name of charity for the city's dependents. In 
Soapy 's opinion the Law was more benign than Philanthropy. 
There was an endless round of institutions, municipal and 
eleemosynary, on which he might set out and receive lodging 
and food accordant with the simple life. But to one of 
Soapy 's proud spirit the gifts of charity are encumbered. 
If not in coin you must pay in humiliation of spirit for every 
benefit received at the hands of philanthropy. As Csesar 



THE COP AND THE ANTHEM 105 

had his Brutus, every bed of charity must have its toll of a 
bath, every loaf of bread its compensation of a private and 
personal inquisition. Wherefore it is better to be a guest of 
the law which, though conducted by rules, does not meddle 
unduly with a gentleman's private affairs. 

Soapy, having decided to go to the Island, at once set about 
accomplishing his desire. There were many easy ways of 
doing this. The pleasantest was to dine luxuriously at some 
expensive restaurant; and then, after declaring insolvency, 
be handed over quietly and without uproar to a policeman. 
An accommodating magistrate would do the rest. 

Soapy left his bench and strolled out of the square and 
across the level sea of asphalt, where Broadway and Fifth 
Avenue flow together. Up Broadway he turned, and halted 
at a glittering cafe, where are gathered together nightly the 
choicest products of the grape, the silkworm, and the proto- 
plasm. 

Soapy had confidence in himself from the lowest button 
of his vest upward. He was shaven, and his coat was decent 
and his neat black, ready-tied four-in-hand had been pre- 
sented to him by a lady missionary on Thanksgiving Day. 
If he could reach a table in the restaurant unsuspected, suc- 
cess would be his. The portion of him that would show 
above the table would raise no doubt in the waiter's mind. 
A roasted mallard duck, thought Soapy, would be about the 
thing — ^with a bottle of Chablis, and then Camembert, a 
demi-tasse and a cigar. One dollar for the cigar would be 
enough. The total would not be so high as to call forth any 
supreme manifestation of revenge from the cafe manage- 
ment; and yet the meat would leave him filled and happy for 
the journey to his winter refuge. 

But as Soapy set foot inside the restaurant door the head 
waiter's eye fell upon his frayed trousers and decadent shoes. 
Strong and ready hands turned him about and conveyed him 
in silence and haste to the sidewalk and averted the ignoble 
fate of the menaced mallard. 

Soapy turned off Broadway. It seemed that his route to 



106 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

the coveted island was not to be an epicurean one. Some 
other way of entering Hmbo must be thought of. 

At a corner of Sixth Avenue electric lights and cunningly 
displayed wares behind plate-glass made a shop window con- 
spicuous. Soapy took a cobblestone and dashed it through 
the glass. People came running around the corner, a police- 
man in the lead. Soapy stood still, with his hands in his 
pockets, and smiled at the sight of brass buttons. 

"WTiere's the man that done that.^" inquired the officer 
excitedly. 

"Don't you figure out that I might have had something 
to do with it.^ " said Soapy, not without sarcasm, but friendly, 
as one greets good fortune. 

The policeman's mind refused to accept Soapy even as a 
clue. Men who smash windows do not remain to parley 
with the law's minions. They take to their heels. The 
policeman saw a man half way down the block running to 
catch a car. With drawn club he joined in the pursuit. 
Soapy, with disgust in his heart, loafed along, twice un- 
successful. 

On the opposite side of the street was a restaurant of nc 
great pretensions. It catered to large appetites and modest 
purses. Its crockery and atmosphere were thick; its soup 
and napery thin. Into this place Soapy took his accusive 
shoes and telltale trousers without challenge. At a table 
he sat and consumed beefsteak, flapjacks, doughnuts, and 
pie. And then to the waiter he betrayed the fact that the 
minutest coin and himself were strangers. 

"Now, get busy and call a cop," said Soapy. "And don't 
keep a gentleman waiting." 

"No cop for youse," said the waiter, with a voice like 
butter cakes and an eye like the cherry in a Manhattan 
cocktail. "Hey, Con!" 

Neatly upon his left ear on the callous pavement two 
waiters pitched Soapy. He arose, joint by joint, as a car- 
penter's rule opens, and beat the dust from his clothes. Ar- 
rest seemed but a rosy dream. The Island seemed very far 



THE COP AND THE ANTHEM 107 

away. A policeman who stood before a drug store two 
doors away laughed and walked down the street. 

Five blocks Soapy traveled before his courage permitted 
him to woo capture again. This time the opportunity pre- 
sented what he fatuously termed to himself a "cinch." A 
young woman of a modest and pleasing guise was standing 
before a show window gazing with sprightly interest at its 
display of shaving mugs and inkstands, and two yards from 
the window a large policeman of severe demeanor leaned 
against a water plug. 

It was Soapy 's design to assume the role of the despicable 
and execrated "masher." The refined and elegant appear- 
ance of his victim and the contiguity of the conscientious 
cop encouraged him to believe that he would soon feel 
the pleasant official clutch upon his arm that would 
insure his winter quarters on the right little, tight little 
isle. 

Soapy straightened the lady missionary's ready-made tie, 
dragged his shrinking cuffs into the open, set his hat at a 
killing cant, and sidled toward the young woman. He made 
eyes at her, was taken with sudden coughs and "hems," 
smiled, smirked, and went brazenly through the impudent 
and contemptible litany of the "masher." With half an eye 
Soapy saw that the policeman was watching him fixedly. 
The young woman moved away a few steps, and again be- 
stowed her absorbed attention upon the shaving mugs. 
Soapy followed, boldly stepping to her side, raised his hat 
and said: 

"Ah there, Bedelia! Don't you want to come and play 
in my yard?" 

The policeman was still looking. The persecuted young 
woman had but to beckon a finger and Soapy would be prac- 
tically en route for his insular haven. Already he imagined 
he could feel the cozy warmth of the station-house. The 
young woman faced him and, stretching out a hand, caught 
Soapy 's coat sleeve. 

**Sure, Mike," she said joyfully, "if you'll blow me to a pail 



108 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

of suds I'd have spoke to you sooner, but the cop was 
watching.'* 

With the young woman playing the clinging ivy to his oak 
Soapy walked past the policeman overcome with gloom. He 
seemed doomed to liberty. 

At the next corner he shook off his companion and ran. 
He halted in the district where by night are found the light- 
est streets, hearts, vows, and librettos. Women in furs and 
men in greatcoats moved gaily in the wintry air. A sudden 
fear seized Soapy that some dreadful enchantment had ren- 
dered him immune to arrest. The thought brought a little 
of panic upon it, and when he came upon another policeman 
lounging grandly in front of a transplendent theatre he caught 
at the immediate straw of "disorderly conduct." 

On the sidewalk Soapy began to yell drunken gibberish 
at the top of his harsh voice. He danced, howled, raved, and 
otherwise disturbed the welkin. 

The policeman twirled his club, turned his back to Soapy 
and remarked to a citizen: 

*' 'Tis one of them Yale lads celebratin' the goose egg they 
give to the Hartford College. Noisy; but no harm. We've 
instructions to lave them be." 

Disconsolate, Soapy ceased his unavailing racket. Would 
never a policeman lay hands on him.'^ In his fancy the Island 
seemed an unattainable Arcadia. He buttoned his thin 
coat against the chilling wind. 

In a cigar store he saw a well-dressed man lighting a cigar 
at a swinging light. His silk umbrella he had set by the door 
on entering. Soapy stepped inside, secured the umbrella, 
and sauntered off with it slowly. The man at the cigar light 
followed hastily. 

"My umbrella," he said, sternly. 

"Oh, is it.^" sneered Soapy, adding insult to petit larceny. 
"Well, why don't you call a policeman? I took it. Your 
umbrella! Why don't you call a cop. ^ There stands one on 
the corner." 

The umbrella owner slowed his steps. Soapy did likewise,! 



THE COP AND THE ANTHEM 109 

with a presentiment that luck would again run against him. 
The policeman looked at the two curiously. 

"Of course," said the umbrella man — "that is — well, you 
know how these mistakes occur — I — if it's your umbrella 
I hope you'll excuse me — I picked it up this morning in 
a restaurant — if you recognize it as yours, why — I hope 
you'll " 

"Of course it's mine," said Soapy, viciously. 

The ex-umbrella man retreated. The policeman hurried 
to assist a tall blonde in an opera cloak across the street 
in front of a street car that was approaching two blocks away. 

Soapy walked eastward through a street damaged by im- 
provements. He hurled the umbrella wrathfully into an 
excavation. He muttered against the men who wear helmets 
and carry clubs. Because he wanted to fall into their 
clutches, they seemed to regard him as a king who could do 
no wrong. 

At length Soapy reached one of the avenues to the east 
where the glitter and turmoil was but faint. He set his face 
down this toward Madison Square, for the homing instinct 
survives even when the home is a park bench. 

But on an unusually quiet corner Soapy came to a stand- 
still. Here was an old church, quaint and rambling and 
gabled. Through one violet-stained window a soft light 
glowed, where, no doubt, the organist loitered over the keys, 
making sure of his mastery of the coming Sabbath anthem. 
For there drifted out to Soapy 's ears sweet music that caught 
and held him transfixed against the convolutions of the iron 
fence. 

The moon was above, lustrous and serene; vehicles and 
pedestrians were few; sparrows twittered sleepily in the eaves 
— for a little while the scene might have been a country 
churchyard. And the anthem that the organist played 
cemented Soapy to the iron fence, for he had known it well 
in the days when his life contained such things as mothers 
and roses and ambitions and friends and immaculate thoughts 
and collars. 



110 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

The conjunction of Soapy 's receptive state of mind and the 
influences about the old church wrought a sudden and won- 
derful change in his soul. He viewed with swift horror the 
pit into which he had tumbled, the degraded days, unworthy 
desires, dead hopes, wTccked faculties, and base motives that 
made up his existence. 

And also in a moment his heart responded thrillingly to 
this novel mood. An instantaneous and strong impulse 
moved him to battle with his desperate fate. He would pull 
himself out of the mire; he would make a man of him- 
self again; he would conquer the evil that had taken 
possession of him. There was time; he was comparatively 
young yet; he would resurrect his old eager ambitions and 
pursue them without faltering. Those solemn but sweet 
organ notes had set up a revolution in him. To-morrow he 
would go into the roaring downtown district and find work. 
A fur importer had once offered him a place as driver. He 
would find him to-morrow and ask for the position. He 
would be somebody in the world. He would 

Soapy felt a hand laid on his arm. He looked quickly 
around into the broad face of a policeman. 

"What are you doin' here.'^" asked the oflBcer. 

"Nothin'," said Soapy. 

"Then come along," said the policeman. 

"Three months on the Island," said the Magistrate in the 
Police Court the next morning. 



THE MAKING OF A NEW YORKER 

From The Trimmed Lamp. First published in The World, Janu- 
ary 1, 1905. The second paragraph is as autobiographical as any- 
thing that O. Henry ever wrote unless, perhaps, we except a 
paragraph from The Voice of the City: "I must go and find out," I 
said, "what is the Voice of this city. Other cities have voices. It 
is an assignment. I must have it. New York," I continued, in a 
rising tone, "had better not hand me a cigar and say: 'Old man, I 
can't talk for publication.' No other city acts in that way. Chicago 
says, imhesitatingly, 'I will'; Philadelphia says, 'I should'; New 
Orleans says, T used to'; Louisville says, 'Don't care if I do'; St. 
Louis says, 'Excuse me'; Pittsburgh says, 'Smoke up.' Now, New 

York " One hundred and thirty-eight of O. Henry's stories 

take place in New York, the great city being not merely the station- 
ary locale but a cooperative agent in developing the plot. What 
London was to Johnson, to Lamb, to Dickens, what Paris was to 
Victor Hugo, that was New York to O. Henry. But with a differ- 
'ince. O. Henry persisted to the last m his endeavor to body forth 
\he spirit of New York, to find its central characteristics, to differ- 
entiate it from other cities, to appraise and phrase not only its more 
notable streets, parks, places, etc., but its distinctive service as w^U. 
It is not mere description in which he excels; it is description as an 
aid to characterization, and characterization as an ally of mterpre- 
tation. This is a city, so runs Raggles's experience, that is cold and 
indifferent on the surface but warm-hearted, sympathetic, helpful 
beneath the surface. It is a Levite till you are hurt ; then it is a good 
Samaritan. The very types that seemed to embody the aloofness of 
New York are the first to reach Raggles's side when he is down. 
From this mdividual solicitude shown for the fractured Haggles on 
the pavement, he passes to the organized and institutional charity of 
the hospital. Whoever defames New York now has Raggles to 
reckon with. Compare with this characteristic of New York the 
achievement of the same city recorded in Squaring the Circle. 
page 97. 

Ill 



112 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

Besides many other things, Raggles was a poet. He was 
called a tramp; but that was only an elliptical way of saying 
that he was a philosopher, an artist, a traveler, a naturalist, 
and a discoverer. But most of all he was a poet. In all his 
life he never wrote a line of verse; he lived his poetry. His 
Odyssey would have been a Limerick, had it been written. 
But, to Hnger with the primary proposition, Raggles was a 
poet. 

Raggles's specialty, had he been driven to ink and paper, 
would have been sonnets to the cities. He studied cities as 
women study their reflections in mirrors; as children study 
the glue and sawdust of a dislocated doll; as the men who 
write about wild animals study the cages in the zoo. A city 
to Raggles was not merely a pile of bricks and mortar, 
peopled by a certain number of inhabitants; it was a thing 
with a soul characteristic and distinct; an individual conglom- 
eration of life, with its own peculiar essence, flavor, and feel- 
ing. Two thousand miles to the north and south, east and 
west, Raggles wandered in poetic fervor, taking the cities 
to his breast. He footed it on dusty roads, or sped magnifi- 
cently in freight cars, counting time as of no account. And 
when he had found the heart of a city and listened to its 
secret confession, he strayed on, restless, to another. Fickle 
Raggles! — but perhaps he had not met the civic corporation 
that could engage and hold his critical fancy. 

Through the ancient poets we have learned that the cities 
are feminine. So they were to poet Raggles; and his mind 
carried a concrete and clear conception of the figure that sym- 
bolized and typified each one that he had wooed. 

Chicago seemed to swoop down upon him with a breezy 
suggestion of Mrs. Partington, plumes and patchouli, and to 
disturb his rest with a soaring and beautiful song of future 
promise. But Raggles would awake to a sense of shivering 
cold and a haunting impression of ideals lost in a depressing 
aura of potato salad and fish. 

Thus Chicago affected him. Perhaps there is a vagueness 
and inaccuracy in the description; but that is Raggles's 



THE MAKING OF A NEW YORKER 113 

fault. He should have recorded his sensations in magazine 
poems. 

Pittsburgh impressed him as the play of "Othello" per- 
formed in the Russian language in a railroad station by Dock- 
stader's minstrels. A royal and generous lady this Pittsburgh, 
though — ^homely, hearty, with flushed face, washing the 
dishes in a silk dress and white kid slippers, and bidding 
Raggles sit before the roaring fireplace and drink champagne 
with his pigs' feet and fried potatoes. 

New Orleans had simply gazed down upon him from a 
balcony. He could see her pensive, starry eyes and catch 
the flutter of her fan, and that was all. Only once he came 
face to face with her. It was at dawn, when she was flushing 
the red bricks of the banquette with a pail of water. She 
laughed and hummed a chansonette and filled Raggles's 
shoes with ice-cold water. Allons ! 

Boston construed herself to the poetic Raggles in an erratic 
and singular way. It seemed to him that he had drunk cold 
tea and that the city was a white, cold cloth that had been 
bound tightly around his brow to spur him to some unknown 
but tremendous mental effort. And, after all, he came to 
shovel snow for a livelihood; and the cloth, becoming wet, 
tightened its knots and could not be removed. 

Indefinite and unintelligible ideas, you will say; but your 
disapprobation should be tempered with gratitude, for these 
are poets' fancies — and suppose you had come upon them 
in verse! 

One day Raggles came and laid siege to the heart of the 
great city of Manhattan. She was the greatest of all; and 
he wanted to learn her note in the scale ; to taste and appraise 
and classify and solve and label her and arrange her with the 
other cities that had given him up the secret of their individ- 
uality. And here we cease to be Raggles's translator and be- 
come his chronicler. 

Raggles landed from a ferry-boat one morning and walked 
into the core of the town with the blase air of a cosmopolite. 
He was dressed with care to play the role of an "unidentified 



114 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

man." No country, race, class, clique, union, party clan, or 
bowling association could have claimed him. His clothing, 
which had been donated to him piece-meal by citizens of 
different height, but same number of inches around the heart, 
was not yet as uncomfortable to his figure as those speci- 
mens of raiment, self-measured, that are railroaded to you 
by transcontinental tailors with a suit case, suspenders, silk 
handkerchief, and pearl studs as a bonus. Without money 
— as a poet should be — but with the ardor of an astronomer 
discovering a new star in the chorus of the milky way, or a 
man who has seen ink suddenly flow from his fountain pen, 
Raggles wandered into the great city. 

Late in the afternoon he drew out of the roar and commo- 
tion with a look of dumb terror on his countenance. He 
was defeated, puzzled, discomfited, frightened. Other cities 
had been to him as long primer to read; as country maidens 
quickly to fathom; as send-price-of-subscription-with-answer 
rebuses to solve; as oyster cocktails to swallow; but here was 
one as cold, glittering, serene, impossible as a four-carat 
diamond in a window to a lover outside fingering damply 
in his pocket his ribbon-counter salary. 

The greetings of the other cities he had known — their 
homespun kindliness, their human gamut of rough charity, 
friendly curses, garrulous curiosity, and easily estimated 
credulity or indifference. This city of Manhattan gave him 
no clue; it was walled against him. Like a river of adamant 
it flowed past him in the streets. Never an eye was turned 
upon him; no voice spoke to him. His heart yearned for 
the clap of Pittsburgh's sooty hand on his shoulder; for 
Chicago's menacing but social yawp in his ear; for the pale 
and eleemosynary stare through the Bostonian eyeglass — 
even for the precipitate but unmalicious boot-toe of Louisville 
^r St. Louis. 

On Broadway Raggles, successful suitor of many cities, 
stood, bashful, like any country swain. For the first time he 
experienced the poignant humiliation of being ignored. 
And when he tried to reduce this brilliant, swiftly changing, 



THE MAKING OF A NEW YORKER 115 

ice-cold city to a formula he failed utterly. Poet though he 
was, it offered him no color similes, no points of comparison, 
no flaw in its polished facets, no handle by which he could 
hold it up and view its shape and structure, as he familiarly 
and often contemptuously had done with other towns. The 
houses were interminable ramparts loopholed for defense; 
the people were bright but bloodless spectres passing in 
sinister and selfish array. 

The thing that weighed heaviest on Raggles's soul and 
clogged his poet's fancy was the spirit of absolute egotism 
that seemed to saturate the people as toys are saturated with 
paint. Each one that he considered appeared a monster of 
abominable and insolent conceit. Humanity was gone from 
them; they were toddling idols of stone and varnish, worship- 
ping themselves and greedy for, though oblivious of, worship 
from their fellow graven images. Frozen, cruel, implacable, 
impervious, cut to an identical pattern, they hurried on their 
ways like statues brought by some miracles to motion, while 
soul and feeling lay unaroused in the reluctant marble. 

Gradually Raggles became conscious of certain types. 
One was an elderly gentleman with a snow-white, short beard, 
pink, unwrinkled face and stony, sharp blue eyes, attired in. 
the fashion of a gilded youth, who seemed to personify the 
city's wealth, ripeness, and frigid unconcern. Another type 
was a woman, tall, beautiful, clear as a steel engraving, god- 
dess-like, calm, clothed like the princesses of old, with eyes 
as coldly blue as the reflection of sunlight on a glacier. And 
another was a by-product of this town of marionettes — a 
broad, swaggering, grim, theateningly sedate fellow, with a 
jowl as large as a harvested wheat field, the complexion of a 
baptized infant, and the knuckles of a prize-fighter. This 
type leaned against cigar signs and viewed the world with 
f rapped contumely. 

A poet is a sensitive creature, and Raggles soon shriveled 
in the bleak embrace of the undecipherable. The chill, 
sphinx-like, ironical, illegible, unnatural, ruthless expression 
of the city left him downcast and bewildered. Had it no 



116 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

heart? Better the woodpile, the scolding of vinegar-faced 
housewives at back doors, the kindly spleen of bartenders 
behind provincial free-lunch counters, the amiable truculence 
of rural constables, the kicks, arrests, and happy-go-lucky 
chances of the other vulgar, loud, crude cities than this freez- 
ing heartlessness. 

Raggles summoned his courage and sought alms from the 
populace. Unheeding, regardless, they passed on without 
the wink of an eyelash to testify that they were conscious 
of his existence. And then he said to himself that this fair 
but pitiless city of Manhattan was without a soul; that its 
inhabitants were manikins moved by wires and springs, and 
that he was alone in a great wilderness. 

Raggles started to cross the street. There was a blast, a 
roar, a hissing and a crash as something struck him and 
hurled him over and over six yards from where he had been. 
As he was coming down like the stick of a rocket the earth 
and all the cities thereof turned to a fractured dream. 

Raggles opened his eyes. First an odor made itself known 
to him — an odor of the earliest spring flowers of Paradise. 
And then a hand soft as a falling petal touched his brow. 
Bending over him was the woman clothed like the princess 
of old, with blue eyes, now soft and humid with human 
sympathy. Under his head on the pavement were silks and 
furs. With Raggles's hat in his hand and with his face 
pinker than ever from a vehement burst of oratory against 
reckless driving, stood the elderly gentleman who personified 
the city's wealth and ripeness. From a nearby cafe hurried 
the by-product with the vast jowl and baby complexion, 
bearing a glass full of a crimson fluid that suggested delight- 
ful possibilities. 

"Drink dis, sport," said the by-product, holding the glass 
to Raggles's lips. 

Hundreds of people huddled around in a moment, their 
faces wearing the deepest concern. Two flattering and gorge- 
ous policemen got into the circle and pressed back the over- 
plus of Samaritans. An old lady in a black shawl spoke 



THE MAKING OF A NEW YORKER 117 

loudly of camphor; a newsboy slipped one of his papers be- 
neath Raggles's elbow, where it lay on the muddy pave- 
ment. A brisk young man with a notebook was asking for 
names. 

A bell clanged importantly, and the ambulance cleaned a 
lane through the crowd. A cool surgeon slipped into the 
midst of affairs. 

"How do you feel, old man?" asked the surgeon, stooping 
easily to his task. The princess of silks and satins wiped a 
red drop or two from Raggles's brow with a fragrant cobweb. 

*'Me.^" said Raggles, wath a seraphic smile, *'I feel fine." 

He had found the heart of his new city. 

In three days they let him leave his cot for the convales- 
cent ward in the hospital. He had been in there an hour 
when the attendants heard sounds of conflict. Upon inves- 
tigation they found that Raggles had assaulted and damaged 
a brother convalescent — a glowering transient whom a freight 
train collision had sent in to be patched up. 

"What's all this about.^" inquired the head nurse. 

"He was runnin' down me town," said Raggles. 

"What town?" asked the nurse. 

"Noo York," said Raggles. 



A COSMOPOLITE IN A CAFE 

From The Four Million. First published in The World, January 
22, 1905. Does not the leading character here stand out with the 
utmost distinctness? You may forget that he was named E. Rush- 
more Coglan, but shall j'ou ever forget the kind of man that he was? 
He is not a hypocrite. He firmly believes, as does the hero in Best- 
Seller, that he is what he is proved at last not to be. He is an ex- 
emplar not only of Kipling's quoted lines To the City of Bombay but 
of his later lines on Sussex : 

God gave all men all earth to love, 

But since our hearts are small. 
Ordained for each one spot should prove 

Beloved over all. 

It is greatly to E. Rushmore Coglan's credit that he is self-deceived. 
Says Tennyson: 

That man's the best Cosmopohte 
Who loves his native country best. 

But O. Henry's purpose is so clear and the character plays his part 
so well that to read the story is to remember not so much the plan 
as the character that illustrates the plan. Yet E. Rushmore Coglan 
is no better portrayed than Hargraves or Jimmy Valentine or Tildy 
or Masie or John Perkins or Madame Beaumont or Shark Dodson or 
at least a half dozen of the characters yet to appear. Why, then, 
is the charge sometimes brought against O. Henry that he failed in 
the ability to portray unforgettable characters? Has he failed? 
Of course the comparison must be made with other short story 
writers, not with novelists. Can you mention any other writer, 
living or dead, who confined himself strictly to the short story and 
yet lodged more characters (not names of characters) in the memory 
of more readers than O. Henrys has done? The name of the charac- 
ter among O. Henry's more than a thousand may not be recalled. 

118 



A COSMOPOLITE IN A CAFE 119 

But if the character of the character, his reaction to his environment, 
what he or she did or said, the distinctive trait of human nature that 
each illustrated, the obscure motive that each illumined— if these 
come back, is not the author's art vmdicated? 

At midnight the cafe was crowded. By some chance 
the little table at which I sat had escaped the eye of incom- 
ers, and two vacant chairs at it extended their arms with 
venal hospitality to the influx of patrons. 

And then a cosmopolite sat in one of them, and I was glad, 
for I held a theory that since Adam no true citizen of the 
world has existed. We hear of them, and we see foreign 
labels on much luggage, but we find travelers instead of 
cosmopolites. 

I invoke your consideration of the scene — the marble- 
topped tables, the range of leather-upholstered wall seats, 
the gay company, the ladies dressed in demi-state toilets, 
speaking in an exquisite visible chorus of taste, economy, 
opulence or art; the sedulons and largess-loving gargons, the 
music wisely catering to all with its raids upon the com- 
posers; the melange of talk and laughter— and, if you will, 
the WUrzburger in the tall glass cones that bend to your lips 
as a ripe cherry sways on its branch to the beak of a robber 
jay. I was told by a sculptor from Mauch Chunk that the 
scene was truly Parisian. 

My cosmopolite was named E. Rushmore Coglan, and he 
will be heard from next summer at Coney Island. He is to 
establish a new "attraction" there, he informed me, offering 
kingly diversion. And then his conversation rang along 
parallels of latitude and longitude. He took the great, round 
world in his hand, so to speak, familiarly, contemptuously, 
and it seemed no larger than the seed of a Maraschino cherry 
in a table d'hote grape fruit. He spoke disrespectfully of the 
equator, he skipped from continent to continent, he derided 
the zones, he mopped up the high seas with his napkin. 
With a wave of his hand he would speak of a certain bazaar 
in Hyderabad. Whiff ! He would have you on skis in Lap- 



120 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

land. Zip! Now you rode the breakers with the Kanakas 
at Kealaikahiki. Presto! He dragged you through an 
Arkansas post-oak swamp, let you dry for a moment on the 
alkali plains of his Idaho ranch, then whirled you into the 
society of Viennese archdukes. Anon he would be telling 
you of a cold he acquired in a Chicago lake breeze and how 
old Escamila cured it in Buenos Ayres with a hot infusion 
of the chuchula weed. You would have addressed a letter 
to '*E. Rushmore Coglan, Esq., the Earth, Solar System, 
the Universe," and mailed it, feeling confident that it would 
be delivered to him. 

I was sure that I had found at last the one true cosmopolite 
since Adam, and I listened to his world-wide discourse fearful 
lest I should discover in it the local note of the mere globe- 
trotter. But his opinions never fluttered or drooped; he was 
as impartial to cities, countries, and continents as the winds 
or gravitation. 

And as E. Rushmore Coglan prattled of this little planet 
I thought with glee of a great almost-cosmopolite who wrote 
for the whole world and dedicated himseK to Bombay. In a 
poem he has to say that there is pride and rivalry between the 
cities of the earth, and that "the men that breed from them, 
they traflSc up and down, but cling to their cities' hem as a 
child to the mother's gown." And whenever they walk 
*'by roaring streets unknown" they remember their native 
city "most faithful, foolish, fond; making her mere-breathed 
name their bond upon their bond." And my glee was roused 
because I had caught Mr. Kipling napping. Here I had 
found a man not made from dust; one who had no narrow 
boasts of birthplace or country, one who, if he bragged at all, 
would brag of his whole round globe against the Martians and 
the inhabitants of the Moon. 

Expression on these subjects was precipitated from E. 
Rushmore Coglan by the third corner to our table. While 
Coglan was describing to me the topography along the Si- 
berian Railway the orchestra glided into a medley. The 
concluding air was "Dixie," and as the exliilarating notes 



A COSMOPOLITE IN A CAFfi 121 

tumbled forth they were almost overpowered by a great 
clapping of hands from almost every table. 

It is worth a paragraph to say that this remarkable scene 
can be witnessed every evening in numerous cafes in the City 
of New York. Tons of brew have been consumed over theor- 
ies to account for it. Some have conjectured hastily that all 
Southerners in town hie themselves to cafes at nightfall. 
This applause of the *' rebel" air in a Northern city does 
puzzle a little; but it is not insolvable. The war with Spain, 
many years' generous mint and watermelon crops, a few 
long-shot winners at the New Orleans race track, and the 
brilliant banquets given by the Indiana and Kansas citizens 
who compose the North Carolina Society have made the 
South rather a *'fad" in Manhattan. Your manicure will 
lisp softly that your left forefinger reminds her so much of a 
gentleman's in Richmond, Va. Oh, certainly; but many a 
lady has to work now — the war, you know. 

When "Dixie" was being played a dark-haired young man 
sprang up from somewhere with a Mosby guerrilla yell and 
waved frantically his soft-brimmed hat. Then he strayed 
through the smoke, dropped into the vacant chair at our 
table, and pulled out cigarettes. 

The evening was at the period when reserve is thawed. 
One of us mentioned three Wurzburgers to the waiter; the 
dark-haired young man acknowledged his inclusion in the 
order by a smile and a nod. I hastened to ask him a question 
because I wanted to try out a theory I had. 

"Would you mind telling me," I began, "whether you are 
from " 

The fist of E. Rushmore Coglan banged the table and I was 
jarred into silence. 

"Excuse me," said he, "but that's a question I never like 
to hear asked. What does it matter where a man is from? 
Is it fair to judge a man by his post-office address? WTiy, 
I've seen Kentuckians who hated whiskey, Virginians who 
weren't descended from Pocahontas, Indianians who hadn't 
written a novel, Mexicans who didn't wear velvet trousers 



122 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

with silver dollars sewed along the seams, funny Englishmen, 
spendthrift Yankees, cold-blooded Southerners, narrow- 
minded Westerners, and New Yorkers who were too busy to 
stop for an hour on the street to watch a one-armed grocer's 
clerk do up cranberries in paper bags. Let a man be a man 
and don't handicap him with the label of any section." 

"Pardon me," I said, "but my curiosity was not alto- 
gether an idle one. I know the South, and when the band 
plays 'Dixie' I like to observe. I have formed the belief that 
the man who applauds that air with special violence and os- 
tensible sectional loyalty is invariably a native of either Se- 
caucus, N. J., or the district between Murray Hill Lyceum 
and the Harlem River, this city. I was about to put my 
opinion to the test by inquiring of this gentleman when 
you interrupted with your own — larger theory, I must 
confess." 

And now the dark-haired young man spoke to me, and it 
became evident that his mind also moved along its own set 
of grooves. 

"I should like to be a periwinkle," said he, mysteriously, 
"on the top of a valley, and sing too-ralloo-ralloo." 

This was clearly too obscure, so I turned again to Coglan. 

"I've been around the world twelve times," said he. "I 
know an Esquimau in IJpernavik who sends to Cincinnati for 
his neckties, and I saw a goatherder in Uruguay who won a 
prize in a Battle Creek breakfast food puzzle competition. I 
pay rent on a room in Cairo, Egypt, and another in Yoko- 
hama all the year around. I've got slippers waiting for me 
in a tea-house in Shanghai, and I don't have to tell 'em how 
to cook my eggs in Rio Janeiro or Seattle. It's a mighty little 
old world. What's the use of bragging about being from the 
North, or the South, or the old manor house in the dale, or 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, or Pike's Peak, or Fairfax County, 
Va., or Hooligan's Flats or any place? It'll be a better world 
when we quit being fools about some mildewed town or ten 
acres of swampland just because we happened to be born 
there." 



A COSMOPOLITE IN A CAFE 123 

"You seem to be a genuine cosmopolite," I said admiringly. 
"But it also seems that you would decry patriotism." 

" A relic of the stone age," declared Coglan, warmly. " We 
are all brothers— Chinamen, Englishmen, Zulus, Patagonians, 
and the people in the bend of the Kaw River. Some day all 
this petty pride in one's city or State or section or country 
will be wiped out, and we'll all be citizens of the world, as we 
ought to be." 

" But while you are wandering in foreign lands," I persisted, 
"do not your thoughts revert to some spot — some dear 
and " 

*'Nary a spot," interrupted E. R. Coglan, flippantly. 
"The terrestrial, globular, planetary hunk of matter, slightly 
flattened at the poles, and known as the Earth is my abode. 
I've met a good many object-bound citizens of this country 
abroad. I've seen men from Chicago sit in a gondola in Ven- 
ice on a moonlight night and brag about their drainage canal. 
I've seen a Southerner on being introduced to the King of 
England hand that monarch, without batting his eyes, the 
information that his grand-aunt on his mother's side was re- 
lated by marriage to the Perkinses, of Charleston. I knew a 
New Yorker who was kidnapped for ransom by some Afghan- 
istan bandits. His people sent over the money and he came 
back to Kabul with the agent. 'Afghanistan?' the natives 
said to him through an interpreter. 'Well, not so slow, do 
you think?' 'Oh, I don't know,' says he, and he begins to 
tell them about a cab driver at Sixth Avenue and Broadway. 
Those ideas don't suit me. I'm not tied down to anything 
that isn't 8,000 miles in diameter. Just put me down as E. 
Rushmore Coglan, citizen of the terrestrial sphere." 

My cosmopolite made a large adieu and left me, for he 
thought he saw some one through the chatter and smoke 
whom he knew. So I was left with the would-be periwinkle, 
who was reduced to Wurzburger without further ability to 
voice his aspirations to perch, melodious, upon the summit of 
a valley. 

I sat reflecting upon my evident cosmopolite and wonder- 



124 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

ing how the poet had managed to miss him. He was my 
discovery and I beheved in him. How was it.^ "The men 
that breed from them they traffic up and down, but cHng to 
their cities* hem as a child to the mother's gown." 

Not so E. Rushmore Coglan. With the whole world for 
his 

My meditations were interrupted by a tremendous noise 
and conflict in another part of the cafe. I saw above the 
heads of the seated patrons E. Rushmore Coglan and a 
stranger to me engaged in terrific battle. They fought be- 
tween the tables like Titans, and glasses crashed, and men 
caught their hats up and were knocked down, and a brunette 
screamed, and a blonde began to sing "Teasing." 

My cosmopolite was sustaining the pride and reputation 
of the Earth when the waiters closed in on both combatants 
with their famous flying wedge formation and bore them out- 
side, still resisting. 

I called McCarthy, one of the French gargons, and asked 
him the cause of the conflict. 

"The man with the red tie" (that was my cosmopolite), 
said he, "got hot on account of things said about the bum 
sidewalks and water supply of the place he come from by the 
other guy." 

"Why," said I, bewildered, "that man is a citizen of the 
world — a cosmopolite. He " 

"Orginally from Mattawamkeag, Maine, he said," con- 
tinued McCarthy, "and he wouldn't stand for no knockin' 
the place." 



MAMMON AND THE ARCHER 

From The Four Million. First published in The Worlds March 19. 
1905. This has been called "perhaps the O. Henriest of all O. 
Henry's stories. " Why? Following is a tentative but by no means 
complete summary: (1) The background or setting, "the vast 
space where Broadway, Sixth Avenue, and Thirty-fourth Street 
cross one another," is preeminently O. Henry Land. It is not only 
the Where? of the main action of the story but the Why? and the 
How? "In one sense," says Francis Hackett, "Broadway is the 
spinal column of his art, and the nerve branches cover all Manhat- 
tan." (2) Anthony Rockwall and his sister. Aunt Ellen, are con- 
trasted in a manner and spirit peculiarly O. Henryesque. (3) The 
part of the story following "The story should end here. . . . 
But we must go to the bottom of the well for truth," gives what is 
popularly known as the O. Henry touch. It exhibits the blending of 
the unexpected but inevitable, the unlooked-for but not unprepared' 
for. (4) The humor is irresistible but kindly, elemental, con- 
tagious. You want to read the story aloud to others but you do not 
have to choose your audience for fear that feelings will be hurt. 
There is no class spirit in it. Aunt Ellen is sure that the ring won; 
Rockwall thinks mammon was the victor; we know at last that the 
happy result was brought about by the cooperation of the two. (5) 
The ring in this story, the mole by the left eyebrow in The Furnished 
Room, and the button in A Municipal Report illustrate a favorite 
technical device of the author. (6) Equally characteristic are the 
piquancy, originality, and picturesqueness of the style. "O. Henry 
can introduce a felicity," says a critic, "with a noiselessness that 
numbers him for a flying second among the sovereigns of English." 
Do you find examples in this story? You will find them m the story 
that follows. 

Old Anthony Rockwall, retired manufacturer and pro- 
prietor of Rockwall's Eureka Soap, looked out the library 
mndow of his Fifth Avenue mansion and grinned. His 

125 



126 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

neighbor to the right — the aristocratic clubman, G. Van 
Schuylight Siiffolk-Jones — came out to his waiting motor* 
car, wrinkling a contumelious nostril, as usual, at the Italian 
renaissance sculpture of the soap palace's front elevation. 

"Stuck-up old statuette of nothing doing!" commented 
the ex-Soap King. "The Eden Musee'll get that old frozen 
Nesselrode yet if he don't w^atch out. I'll have this house 
painted red, white, and blue next summer and see if that'll 
make his Dutch nose turn up any higher." 

And then Anthony Rockw^all, who never cared for bells, 
went to the door of his library and shouted "Mike!" in the 
same voice that had once chipped off pieces of the welkin on 
the Kansas prairies. 

"Tell my son," said Anthony to the answering menial, 
**to come in here before he leaves the house." 

When young Rockwall entered the library the old man 
laid aside his newspaper, looked at him with a kindly grim- 
ness on his big, smooth, ruddy countenance, rumpled his mop 
of white hair with one hand, and rattled the keys in his pocket 
with the other. 

"Richard," said Anthony Rockwall, "what do you pay 
for the soap that you use?" 

Richard, only six months home from college, was startled a 
little. He had not yet taken the measure of this sire of his, 
who was as full of unexpectednesses as a girl at her first party. 

"Six dollars a dozen, I think, dad." 

"And your clothes?" 

"I suppose about sixty dollars, as a rule." 

"You're a gentleman," said Anthony, decidedly. "I've 
heard of these young bloods spending $24 a dozen for soap, 
and going over the hundred mark for clothes. You've got as 
much money to waste as any of 'em, and yet you stick to 
what's decent and moderate. Now I use the old Eureka — 
not only for sentiment, but it's the purest soap made. When- 
ever you pay more than 10 cents a cake for soap you buy 
bad perfumes and labels. But 50 cents is doing very w^ell for 
a young man in your generation, position, and condition. As 



MAMMON AND THE ARCHER 127 

I said, you're a gentleman. They say it takes three genera- 
tions to make one. They're off. Money'll do it as sHck as 
soap grease. It's made you one. By hokey! it's almost 
made one of me. I'm nearly as impolite and disagreeable 
and ill-mannered as these two old Knickerbocker gents on 
each side of me that can't sleep of nights because I bought in 
between 'em." 

"There are some things that money can't accomplish," 
remarked young Rockwall, rather gloomily. 

"Now, don't say that," said old Anthony, shocked. "I 
bet my money on money every time. I've been through the 
encyclopaedia down to Y looking for something you can't buy 
with it; and I expect to have to take up the appendix next 
week. I'm for money against the field. Tell me something 
money won't buy." 

"For one thing," answered Richard, rankling a little, "it 
won't buy one into the exclusive circles of society." 

"Oho! won't it.''" thundered the champion of the root of 
evil. "You tell me where your exclusive circles would be if 
the first Astor hadn't had the money to pay for his steerage 
passage over?" 

Richard sighed. 

"And that's what I was coming to," said the old man, less 
boisterously. " That's why I asked you to come in. There's 
something going wrong with you, boy. I've been noticing it 
for two weeks. Out with it. I guess I could lay my hands 
on eleven millions within twenty-four hours, besides the real 
estate. If it's your liver, there's the Rambler down in the 
bay, coaled, and ready to steam down to the Bahamas in two 
days." 

"Not a bad guess, dad; you haven't missed it far." 

"Ah," said Anthony, keenly; "what's her name.^^" 

Richard began to walk up and down the library floor. 
There was enough comradeship and sympathy in this crude 
old father of his to draw his confidence. 

"Why don't you ask her.^ " demanded old Anthony. "She'll 
jump at you. You've got the money and the looks, and 



128 STORIES FROM 0. HENRY 

you're a decent boy. Your hands are clean. You've got no 
Eureka soap on 'em. You've been to college, but she'll 
overlook that." 

**I haven't had a chance," said Richard. 

"Make one," said Anthony. "Take her for a walk in the 
park, or a straw ride, or walk home with her from church. 
Chance! Pshaw!" 

"You don't know the social mill, dad. She's part of the 
stream that turns it. Every hour and minute of her time is 
arranged for days in advance. I must have that girl, dad, 
or this town is a blackjack swamp forevermore. And I can't 
write it — I can't do that." 

"Tut!" said the old man. "Do you mean to tell me that 
with all the money I've got you can't get an hour or two of a 
girl's time for yourself.'^" 

"I've put it off too late. She's going to sail for Europe at 
noon day after to-morrow for a two years' stay. I'm to 
s€3 her alone to-morrow evening for a few minutes. She's 
at Larchmont now at her aunt's. I can't go there. But 
I'm allowed to meet her with a cab at the Grand Central 
Station to-morrow evening at the 8.30 train. We drive down 
Broadway to Wallack's at a gallop, where her mother and a 
box party will be w^aiting for us in the lobby. Do you think 
she would listen to a declaration from me during that six or 
eight minutes under those circumstances? No. And what 
chance would I have in the theatre or afterward? None. 
No, dad, this is one tangle that your money can't unravel. 
We can't buy one minute of time with cash; if we could, rich 
people would live longer. There's no hope of getting a talk 
with Miss Lantry before she sails." 

"All right, Richard, my boy," said old Anthony, cheerfully. 
"You may run along do\\Ti to your club now. I'm glad it 
ain't your liver. But don't forget to burn a few punk sticks 
in the joss house to the great god Mazuma from time to time. 
You say money won't buy time? Well, of course, you can't 
order eternity wrapped up and delivered at your residence 
for a price, but I've seen Father Time get pretty bad stone 



MAMMON AND THE ARCHER 1^9 

bruises on his heels when he walked through the gold dig- 
gings." 

That night came Aunt Ellen, gentle, sentimental, wrinkled, 
sighing, oppressed by wealth, in to Brother Anthony at his 
evening paper, and began discourse on the subject of lovers' 
woes. 

"He told me all about it," said brother Anthony, yawning. 
**I told him my bank account was at his service. And then 
he began to knock money. Said money couldn't help. Said 
the rules of society couldn't be bucked for a yard by a team of 
ten-millionaires. ' ' 

"Oh, Anthony," sighed Aunt Ellen, "I wish you would not 
think so much of money. Wealth is nothing where a true 
affection is concerned. Love is all-powerful. If he only had 
spoken earlier! She could not have refused our Richard. 
But now I fear it is too late. He will have no opportunity 
to address her. All your gold cannot bring happiness to your 
son." 

At eight o'clock the next evening Aunt Ellen took a quaint 
old gold ring from a moth-eaten case and gave it to Richard. 

"Wear it to-night, nephew," she begged. "Your mother 
gave it to me. Good luck in love she said it brought. She 
asked me to give it to you when you had found the one you 
loved." 

Young Rockwall took the ring reverently and tried it on 
his smallest finger. It slipped as far as the second joint and 
stopped. He took it off and stuffed it into his vest pocket, 
after the manner of man. And then he 'phoned for his cab. 

At the station he captured Miss Lantry out of the gadding 
mob at eight thirty-two. 

"We mustn't keep mamma and the others waiting," said 
she. 

"To Wallack's Theatre as fast as you can drive!" said 
Richard loyally. 

They whirled up Forty-second to Broadway, and then down 
the white-starred lane that leads from the soft meadows of 
sunset to the rocky hills of morning. 



130 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

At Thirty-tourth Street young Richard quickly thrust up 
the trap and ordered the cabman to stop. 

"I've dropped a ring," he apologized, as he chmbed out. 
**It was my mother's, and I'd hate to lose it. I won't detain 
you a minute — I saw where it fell." 

In less than a minute he was back in the cab with the ring. 

But within that minute a crosstown car had stopped di- 
rectly in front of the cab. The cabman tried to pass to the 
left, but a hea\y express wagon cut him off. He tried the 
right, and had to back away from a furniture van that had no 
business to be there. He tried to back out, but dropped his 
reins and swore dutifully. He was blockaded in a tangled 
mess of vehicles and horses. 

One of those street blockades had occurred that sometimes 
tie up commerce and movement quite suddenly in the big city. 

"Why don't you drive on?" said Miss Lantry, impa- 
tiently. "We'll be late." 

Richard stood up in the cab and looked around. He saw 
a congested flood of wagons, trucks, cabs, vans, and street 
cars filling the vast space where Broadway, Sixth Avenue, 
and Thirty-fourth Street cross one another as a twenty-six 
inch maiden fills her twenty-two inch girdle. And still from 
all the cross streets they were hurrying and rattling toward 
the converging point at full speed, and hurling themselves 
into the struggling mass, locking wheels and adding their 
drivers' imprecations to the clamor. The entire traffic of 
Manhattan seemed to have jammed itself around them. 
The oldest New Yorker among the thousands of spectators 
that lined the sidewalks had not witnessed a street blockade 
of the proportions of this one. 

"I'm very sorry," said Richard, as he resumed his seat, 
"but it looks as if we are stuck. They won't get this jumble 
loosened up in an hour. It was my fault. E I hadn't 
dropped the ring we " 

"Let me see the ring," said Miss Lantry. "Now that it 
can't be helped, I don't care. I think theatres are stupid, 
anyway. " 



MAMMON AND THE ARCHER 131 

At 11 o'clock that night somebody tapped hghtly on An- 
thony Rockwall's door. 

"Come in," shouted Anthony, who was in a red dressing- 
gown, reading a book of piratical adventures. 

Somebody was Aunt Ellen, looking like a gray-haired angel 
that had been left on earth by mistake. 

*' They 're engaged, Anthony," she said, softly. "She has 
promised to marry our Richard. On their way to the theatre 
there was a street blockade, and it was two hours before their 
cab could get out of it. 

"And oh, brother Anthony, don't ever boast of the power 
of money again. A little emblem of true love— a little ring 
that symbolized unending and unmercenary affection — was 
the cause of our Richard finding his happiness. He dropped 
it in the street, and got out to recover it. And before they 
could continue the blockade occurred. He spoke to his love 
and won her there while the cab was hemmed in. Money is 
dross compared with true love, Anthony." 

"All right," said old Anthony. "I'm glad the boy has 
got what he wanted. I told him I wouldn't spare any ex- 
pense in the matter if " 

"But, brother Anthony, what good could your money have 
done.^" 

"Sister," said Anthony Rockwall. "I've got my pirate 
in a devil of a scrape. His ship has just been scuttled, and 
he's too good a judge of the value of money to let drown. I 
wish you would let me go on with this chapter." 

The story should end here. I wish it would as heartily 
as you who read it wish it did. But we must go to the bot- 
tom of the well for truth. 

The next day a person with red hands and a blue polka- 
dot necktie, who called himself Kelly, called at Anthony 
Rockwall's house, and was at once received in the library. 
"Well," said Anthony, reaching for his cheque-book, 
'*it was a good bihn' of soap. Let's see— you had $5,000 in 
cash." 

"I paid out $300 more of my own," said Kelly. "I had 



132 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

to go a little above the estimate. I got the express wagons 
and cabs mostly for $5; but the trucks and two-horse teams 
mostly raised me to $10. The motormen wanted $10, and 
some of the loaded teams $20. The cops struck me hardest 
— $50 I paid two, and the rest $20 and $25. But didn't it 
work beautiful, Mr. Rockwall.^ I'm glad William A. Brady 
wasn't onto that little outdoor vehicle mob scene. I 
wouldn't want Wilham to break his heart with jealousy, 
And never a rehearsal, either! The boys was on time to the 
fraction of a second. It was two hours before a snake could 
get below Greeley's statue. " 

"Thirteen hundred — there you are, Kelly," said Anthony, 
tearing off a check. "Your thousand, and the $300 you were 
out. You don't despise money, do you, Kelly?" 

"Me?" said Kelly. "I can lick the man that invented 
poverty." 

Anthony called Kelly when he was at the door. 

"You didn't notice," said he, "anywhere in the tie-up, 
a kind of a fat boy without any clothes on shooting arrows 
around with a bow, did you? " 

"Why, no," said Kelly, mystified. "I didn't. If he was 
like you say, maybe the cops pinched him before I got there." 

"I thought the little rascal wouldn't be on hand," chuckled 
Anthony. "Good-by, Kelly." 



AN UNFINISHED STORY 

From The Four Million. First published in McClure's Magazine, 
A.ugust, 1905. Two months later O. Henrj^ built another indictment. 
The Guilty Party, on the framework of An Unfinished Story; but the 
latter maintains its supremacy. In the plebiscite held by The Book- 
man, June, 1914, in which ten persons voted independently on the 
ten best stories by O. Henry, An Unfinished Story led with seven 
votes, A Municipal Report coming next with six votes. Then 
followed A Lickpenny Lover, The Furnished Room, and The Gift of 
the Magi, each with four votes; Mammon and the Archer and Let Me 
Feel Your Pulse, each with two votes. One of the finest touches 
in the story is the sudden and unexpected emergence of General 
Kitchener. O. Henry's tribute to his eyes was recalled by a London 
paper at the time of Lord Kitchener's death. "They strike you," 
says Harold Begbie in Kitchener: Organizer of Victory, "with a kind of 
clutching terror; you look at them, try to say something, look away, 
and then, trying to speak, find your eyes returning to that dreadful 
gaze, and once more choke with silence." Dulcie holds her own 
or is held to her own until General Kitchener " happens to be looking 
the other way." It is not often that O. Henry expresses loathing 
for anybody. It is worth noting, however, that the three most 
loathsome characters in our twenty-five stories are pilloried by O. 
Henry for the same offence, their treatment of women. Compare 
Mrs. Purdy in TJie Furnished Room, Piggy in this story, and Major 
Caswell in A Municipal Report. Piggy, the "connoisseur in star- 
vation," finds his prey only because there are men who hire working- 
girls for five or six dollars a week. It is for these employers that O. 
Henry reserves his terminal lightning. If satire is to humor as 
corporal punishment is to moral suasion, this story hints the gallows. 

We no longer groan and heap ashes upon our heads when 
the flames of Tophet are mentioned. For, even the preachers 
have begun to tell us that God is radium, or ether or some 
