THE PENDULUM 69 

Katy had never been unresponsive. Tears: — yes, tears — 
came into John Perkins's eyes. When she came back things 
would be different. He would make up for all his neglect. 
What was life without her? 

The door opened. Katy walked in carrying a little hand 
satchel. John stared at her stupidly. 

"My! I'm glad to get back," said Katy. "Ma wasn't 
sick to amount to anything. Sam was at the depot, and said 
she just had a little spell, and got all right soon after they 
telegraphed. So I took the next train back. I'm just dying 
for a cup of coffee." 

Nobody heard the click and rattle of the cog-wheels as the 
third-floor front of the Frogmore flats buzzed its machinery 
back into the Order of Things. A band slipped, a spring was 
touched, the gear was adjusted, and the wheels revolved in 
their old orbit. 

John Perkins looked at the clock. It was 8.15. He 
reached for his hat and walked to the door. 

"Now, where are you going, I'd like to know, John Per^ 
kins?" asked Katy, in a querulous tone. 

"Thought I'd drop up to McCloskey's," said John, "and 
play a game or two of pool with the fellows." 



TRANSIENTS IN ARCADIA 

From The Voice of the City. First published in The World, July 
17, 1904. "There was a certain Caliph of Bagdad," says O. Henry 
in The Caliph and the Cad, written a few months before Transients in 
Arcadia, "who was accustomed to go dowTi among the poor and 
lowly for the solace obtained from the relation of their tales and 
histories. Is it not strange that the humble and poverty-stricken 
have not availed themselves of the pleasure they might glean by 
donning diamonds and silks and playing Caliph among the haunts 
of the upper world ^ There was one who saw the possibilities of thus 
turning the tables on Haroun al Raschid. His name was Corny 
Brannigan. " No, his name was O. Henry. He not only turned the 
tables on Haroun al Raschid but illustrated a new phase of psy- 
chology and colonized a new area for the short story. 

There is a hotel on Broadway that has escaped discovery 
by the summer-resort promoters. It is deep and wide and 
cool. Its rooms are finished in dark oak of a low temperature. 
Home-made breezes and deep-green shrubbery give it the 
delights without the inconveniences of the Adirondacks. 
One can mount its broad staircases or glide dreamily upward 
in its aerial elevators, attended by guides in brass buttons, 
with a serene joy that Alpine climbers have never attained. 
T^ere is a chef in its kitchen who will prepare for you brook 
trout better than the White Mountains ever served, sea food 
that would turn Old Point Comfort— "by Gad, sah!"— 
green with envy, and Maine venison that would melt the 
oflScial heart of a game warden. 

A few have found out this oasis in the July desert of 
Manhattan. During that month you will see the hotel's 
reduced array of guests scattered luxuriously about in the 
cool twilight of its lofty dining-room, gazing at one another 

70 



TRANSIENTS IN ARCADIA 71 

across the snowy waste of unoccupied tables, silently con- 
gratulatory. 

Superfluous, watchful, pneumatically moving waiters 
hover near, supplying every want before it is expressed. 
The temperature is perpetual April. The ceiling is painted 
in water colors to counterfeit a summer sky across which 
delicate clouds drift and do not vanish as those of nature do 
to our regret. 

The pleasing, distant roar of Broadway is transformed in 
the imagination of the happy guests to the noise of a waterfall 
filhng the woods with its restful sound. At every strange 
footstep the guests turn an anxious car, fearful lest their 
retreat be discovered and invaded by the restless pleasure- 
seekers who are forever hounding nature to her deepest lairs. 

Thus in the depopulated caravansary the little band of 
connoisseurs jealously hide themselves during the heated 
season, enjoying to the uttermost the delights of mountain 
and seashore that art and skill have gathered and served to 
them. 

In this July came to the hotel one whose card that she sent 
to the clerk for her name to be registered read "Mme. Heloise 
D'Arcy Beaumont." 

Madame Beaumont was a guest such as the Hotel Lotus 
loved. She possessed the fine air of the elite, tempered and 
sweetened by a cordial graciousness that made the hotel 
employes her slaves. Bell-boys fought for the honor of 
answering her ring; the clerks, but for the question of owner- 
ship, would have deeded to her the hotel and its contents; 
the other guests regarded her as the final touch of feminine 
exclusiveness and beauty that rendered the entourage per- 
fect. 

This super-excellent guest rarely left the hotel. Her 
habits were consonant with the customs of the discriminating 
patrons of the Hotel Lotus. To enjoy that delectable 
hostelry one must forego the city as though it were leagues 
away. By night a brief excursion to the nearby roofs is in 
order; but during the torrid day one remains in the um- 



72 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

brageous fastnesses of the Lotus as a trout hangs poised in 
the pellucid sanctuaries of his favorite pool. 

Though alone in the Hotel Lotus, Madame Beaumont 
preserved the state of a queen whose loneliness was of position 
only. She breakfasted at ten, a cool, sweet, leisurely, deli- 
cate being who glowed softly in the dimness like a jasmine 
flower in the dusk. 

But at dinner was Madame 's glory at its height. She wore 
a gown as beautiful and immaterial as the mist from an un- 
seen cataract in a mountain gorge. The nomenclature of 
this gown is beyond the guess of the scribe. Always pale-red 
roses reposed against its lace-garnished front. It was a 
gown that the head-waiter viewed with respect and met at 
the door. You thought of Paris when you saw it, and maybe 
of mysterious countesses, and certainly of Versailles and 
rapiers and IMrs. Fiske and rouge-et-noir. There was an 
untraceable rumor in the Hotel Lotus that Madame was s 
cosmopolite, and that she was pulling with her slender white 
hands certain strings between the nations in the favor of 
Russia. Being a citizeness of the world's smoothest roads it 
was small wonder that she was quick to recognize in the 
refined purlieus of the Hotel Lotus the most desirable spot in 
America for a restful sojourn during the heat of mid-summer. 

On the third day of Madame Beaumont's residence in the 
hotel a young man entered and registered himself as a guest. 
His clothing — to speak of his points in approved order — was 
quietly in the mode; his features good and regular; his ex- 
pression that of a poised and sophisticated man of the world. 
He informed the clerk that he would remain three or four 
days, inquired concerning the sailing of European steamships, 
and sank into the blissful inanition of the nonpareil hotel 
with the contented air of a traveler in his favorite inn. 

The young man — not to question the veracity of the regis- 
ter — was Harold Farrington. He drifted into the exclusive 
and calm current of life in the Lotus so tactfully and silently 
that not a ripple alarmed his fellow-seekers after rest. He 
ate in the Lotus and of its patronym, and was lulled into bliss- 



TRANSIENTS IN ARCADIA 73 

ful peace with the other fortunate mariners. In one day he 
acquired his table and his waiter and the fear lest the panting 
chasers after repose that kept Broadway warm should pounce 
upon and destroy this contiguous but covert haven. 

After dinner on the next day after the arrival of Harold 
Farrington Madame Beaumont dropped her handkerchief in 
passing out. Mr. Farrington recovered and returned it with- 
out the effusiveness of a seeker after acquaintance. 

Perhaps there was a mystic freemasonry between the dis- 
criminating guests of the Lotus. Perhaps they were drawn 
one to another by the fact of their common good fortune in 
discovering the acme of summer resorts in a Broadway hotel. 
Words delicate in courtesy and tentative in departure from 
formality passed between the two. And, as if in the ex- 
pedient atmosphere of a real summer resort, an acquaintance 
grew, flowered, and fructified on the spot as does the mystic 
plant of the conjuror. For a few moments they stood on a 
balcony upon which the corridor ended, and tossed the 
feathery ball of conversation. 

"One tires of the old resorts," said Madame Beaumont, 
with a faint but sweet smile. "What is the use to fly to the 
mountains or the seashore to escape noise and dust when the 
very people that make both follow us there?" 

"Even on the ocean," remarked Farrington, sadly, "the 
Philistines be upon you. The most exclusive steamers are 
getting to be scarcely more than ferry boats. Heaven help 
us when the summer resorter discovers that the Lotus is 
further away from Broadway than Thousand Islands or 
Mackinac." 

"I hope our secret will be safe for a week, anyhow," said 
Madame, with a sigh and a smile. "I do not know where I 
would go if they should descend upon the dear Lotus. I 
know of but one place so delightful in summer, and that is the 
castle of Count Polinski, in the Ural Mountains." 

"I hear that Baden-Baden and Cannes are almost deserted 
this season," said Farrington. "Year by year the old resorts 
fall in disrepute. Perhaps many others, like ourselves, are 



74 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

seeking out the quiet nooks that are overlooked by the 
majority." 

"I promise myself three days more of this delicious rest," 
said Madame Beaumont. "On Monday the Cedric sails." 

Harold Farrington's eyes proclaimed his regret. "I 
too must leave on Monday," he said, *'but I do not go 
abroad." 

Madame Beaumont shrugged one round shoulder in a 
foreign gesture. 

''One cannot hide here forever, charming though it may be. 
The chateau has been in preparation for me longer than a 
month. Those house parties that one must give — ^rv^hat a 
nuisance! But I shall never forget my week in the Hotel 
Lotus." 

"Nor shall I," said Farrington in a low voice, "and I shall 
neyer forgive the Cedric.'' 

On Sunday evening, three days afterward, the two sat at a 
little table on the same balcony. A discreet waiter brought 
ices and small glasses of claret cup. 

Madame Beaumont wore the same beautiful evening gown 
that she had worn each day at dinner. She seemed thought- 
ful. Near her hand on the table lay a small chatelaine purse. 
After she had eaten her ice she opened the purse and took out 
a one-dollar bill. 

"Mr. Farrington," she said, with the smile that had won 
the Hotel Lotus, "I want to tell you something. I'm going 
to leave before breakfast in the morning, because I've got to 
go back to my work. I'm behind the hosiery counter at 
Casey's Mammoth Store, and my vacation's up at eight 
^'clock to-morrow. That paper dollar is the last cent I'll see 
till I draw my eight dollars salary next Saturday night. 
You're a real gentleman, and you've been good to me, and I 
wanted to tell you before I went. 

"I've been saving up out of my wages for a year just for 
this vacation. I wanted to spend one week like a lady if I 
never do another one. I wanted to get up when I please 
instead of having to crawl out at seven every morning; and 



TRANSIENTS IN ARCADIA 75 

I wanted to live on the best and be waited on and ring beUs 
for things just hke rich folks do. Now I've done it, and I've 
had the happiest time I ever expect to have in my life. I'm 
going back to my work and my little hall bedroom satisfied 
for another year. I wanted to tell you about it, Mr. Farring- 
ton, because I — I thought you kind of liked me, and I — I 
liked you. But, oh, I couldn't help deceiving you up till 
now, for it was all just like a fairy tale to me. So I talked 
about Europe and the things I've read about in other coun- 
tries, and made you think I was a great lady. 

"This dress I've got on — it's the only one I have that's fit 
to wear — I bought from O'Dowd & Levinsky on the instal- 
ment plan. 

"Seventy-five dollars is the price, and it was made to 
measure. I paid $10 down, and they're to collect $1 a week 
till it's paid for. That'll be about all I have to say, Mr. 
Farrington, except that my name is Mamie Siviter instead of 
Madame Beaumont, and I thank you for your attentions. 
This dollar will pay the instalment due on the dress to- 
morrow. I guess I'll go up to my room now." 

Harold Farrington listened to the recital of the Lotus's 
loveliest guest with an impassive countenance. WTien she 
had concluded he drew a small book like a checkbook from 
his coat pocket. He wrote upon a blank form in this with a 
stub of pencil, tore out the leaf, tossed it over to his com- 
panion and took up the paper dollar. 

"I've got to go to work, too, in the morning," he said, 
"and I might as well begin now. There's a receipt for the 
dollar instalment. I've been a collector for O'Dowd & 
Levinsky for three years. Funny, ain't it, that you and me 
both had the same idea about spending our vacation? I've 
always wanted to put up at a swell hotel, and I saved up out 
of my twenty per, and did it. Say, Mame, how about a trip 
to Coney Saturday night on the boat — what?" 

The face of the pseudo Madame Heloise D'Arcy Beaumont 
beamed. 

"Oh, you bet I'll go, Mr. Farrington. The store closes at 



76 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

twelve on Saturdays. I guess Coney '11 be all right even if 
we did spend a week with the swells." 

Below the balcony the sweltering city growled and buzzed 
in the July night. Inside the Hotel Lotus the tempered, 
cool shadows reigned, and the solicitous waiter single-footed 
near the low windows, ready at a nod to serve Madame and 
her escort. 

At the door of the elevator Farrington took his leave, and 
Madame Beaumont made her last ascent. But before they 
reached the noiseless cage he said: "Just forget that 'Harold 
Farrington,* will you? — McManus is the name — James Mc- 
Manus. Some call me Jimmy." 

"Good-night, Jimmy," said Madame, 



THE ROADS WE TAKE 

From Whirligigs. First published in The Worlds August 7, 1904. 
Tidball's summary (page 80), a Western version of, 

*'The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars. 
But in ourselves, that we are underlings," 

is a direct denial of the fatalism found in Roads of Destiny (page 16). 
When Channing Pollock's melodrama, called also Roads of Destiny 
and suggested by O. Henry's story, was put upon the stage in New 
York, November 27, 1918, it was explained that the original stark 
fatalism of O. Henry's story had been tempered with more modern 
and Western thought: *'Fate, inexorable as it is, is in some measure, 
at least, the result of character. The power which decrees our ends 
is within ourselves — the things we think and are." This is precisely 
O. Henry's doctrme in The Roads We Take. There is a striking 
adumbration of this story in a passage from Colonel Roosevelt's 
Winning of the West, volume I, chapter 5. He is speaking of the 
backwoodsmen of the AUeghanies: "All qualities, good and bad, 
are intensified and accentuated in the life of the wilderness. The 
man who in civilization is merely sullen and bad-tempered becomes a 
murderous, treacherous ruffian when transplanted to the wilds; while, 
on the other hand, his cheery, quiet neighbor develops into a hero, 
ready uncomplainingly to lay down his life for his friend. One who 
in an eastern city is merely a backbiter and slanderer, in the western 
woods lies in wait for his foe with a rifle; sharp practice in the East 
becomes highway robbery in the West." Note in the next to the last 
paragraph of the story the same illuminating use of repetition that 
formed a characteristic of Roads of Destiny. 

Twenty miles west of Tucson the "Sunset Express" 
stopped at a tank to take on water. Besides the aqueous 
addition the engine of that famous flyer acquired some other 
things that were not good for it. 

77 



78 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

While the fireman was lowering the feeding hose, Bob 
Tidball, "Shark" Dodson, and a quarter-bred Creek Indian 
called John Big Dog climbed on the engine and showed the 
engineer three round orifices in pieces of ordnance that they 
carried. These orifices so impressed the engineer with their 
possibilities that he raised both hands in a gesture such as 
accompanies the ejaculation "Do tell!" 

At the crisp command of Shark Dodson, who was leader 
of the attacking force, the engineer descended to the ground 
and uncoupled the engine and tender. Then John Big Dog, 
perched upon the coal, sportively held two guns upon the 
engine driver and the fireman, and suggested that they run 
the engine fifty yards away and there await further orders. 

Shark Dodson and Bob Tidball, scorning to put such low- 
grade ore as the passengers through the mill, struck out for 
the rich pocket of the express car. They found the messenger 
serene in the belief that the "Sunset Express" was taking on 
nothing more stimulating and dangerous than aqua pura. 
While Bob was knocking this idea out of his head with the 
butt-end of his six-shooter Shark Dodson was already dosing 
the express-car safe with dynamite. 

The safe exploded to the tune of $30,000, all gold and 
currency. The passengers thrust their heads casually out of 
the windows to look for the thunder-cloud. The conductor 
jerked at the bell-rope, which sagged down loose and un- 
resisting, at his tug. Shark Dodson and Bob Tidball, with 
their booty in a stout canvas bag, tumbled out of the express 
car and ran awkwardly in their high-heeled boots to the 
engine. 

The engineer, sullenly angry but wise, ran the engine, 
according to orders, rapidly away from the inert train. But 
before this was accomplished the express messenger, re- 
covered from Bob Tidball's persuader to neutrality, jumped 
out of his car with a Winchester rifle and took a trick in the 
game. IVir. John Big Dog, sitting on the coal tender, un- 
wittingly made a wrong lead by giving an imitation of a tar- 
get, and the messenger trumped him. With a ball exactly 



THE ROADS WE TAKE 79 

between his shoulder blades the Creek chevalier of industry- 
rolled off to the ground, thus increasing the share of his com- 
rades in the loot by one sixth each. 

Two miles from the tank the engineer was ordered to stop. 

The robbers waved a defiant adieu and plunged down the 
steep slope into the thick woods that lined the track. Five 
minutes of crashing through a thicket of chaparral brought 
them to open woods, where three horses were tied to low- 
hanging branches. One was waiting for John Big Dog, who 
would never ride by night or day again. This animal the 
robbers divested of saddle and bridle and set free. They 
mounted the other two with the bag across one pommel, and 
rode fast and with discretion through the forest and up a 
primeval, lonely gorge. Here the animal that bore Bob 
Tidball sUpped on a mossy boulder and broke a foreleg. 
They shot him through the head at once and sat down to 
hold a council of flight. Made secure for the present by the 
tortuous trail they had traveled, the question of time was no 
longer so big. Many miles and hours lay between them and 
the spryest posse that could follow. Shark Dodson's horse, 
with trailing rope and dropped bridle, panted and cropped 
thankfully of the grass along the stream in the gorge. Bob 
Tidball opened the sack, drew out double handfuls of the 
neat packages of currency and the one sack of gold, and 
chuclded with the glee of a child. 

"Say, you old double-decked pirate," he called joyfully 
to Dodson, "you said we could do it— you got a head for 
financing that knocks the horns off of anything in Arizona." 

"What are we going to do about a hoss for you, Bob? We 
ain't got long to wait here. They'll be on our trail before 
daylight in the mornin'." 

"Oh, I guess that cayuse of yourn'U carry double for a 
while," answered the sanguine Bob. "We'll annex the first 
animal we come across. By jingoes, we made a haul, didn't 
we? Accordin' to the marks on this money there's $30,000 — 
$15,000 apiece!" 

"It's short of what I expected," said Shark Dodson. kick- 



80 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

ing softly at the packages with the toe of his boot. And then 
he looked pensively at the wet sides of his tired horse. 

'*01d Bolivar's mighty nigh played out," he said, slowly. 
*'I wish that sorrel of yours hadn't got hurt." 

"So do I," said Bob, heartily, "but it can't be helped. 
Bolivar's got plenty of bottom — he'll get us both far enough 
to get fresh mounts. Dang it, Shark, I can't help thinkin' 
how funny it is that an Easterner like you can come out 
here and give us Western fellows cards and spades in the 
desperado business. What part of the East was you from, 
anyway.?" 

New York State," said Shark Dodson, sitting down on a 
boulder and chewing a twig. "I was born on a farm in 
Ulster County. I ran aw^ay from home when I was seven- 
teen. It was an accident my comin' West. I was walkin' 
along the road with my clothes in a bundle, makin' for New 
York City. I had an idea of goin' there and makin' lots of 
money. I always felt like I could do it. I came to a place 
one evenin' where the road forked and I didn't know which 
fork to take. I studied about it for half an hour, and then I 
took the left-hand. That night I run into the camp of a 
Wild West show that was travelin' among the little towns, 
and I went West with it. I've often wondered if I wouldn't 
have turned out different if I'd took the other road." 

"Oh, I reckon you'd have ended up about the same," said 
Bob Tidball, cheerfully philosophical. "It ain't the roads 
we take; it's what's inside of us that makes us turn out the 
way we do." 

Shark Dodson got up and leaned against a tree. 

"I'd a good deal rather that sorrel of yourn hadn't hurt 
himself, Bob," he said again, almost pathetically. 

"Same here," agreed Bob; "he was sure a first-rate kind of 
a crowbait. But Bolivar, he'll pull us through all right. 
Reckon we'd better be movin' on, hadn't we. Shark.? I'll 
bag this boodle ag'in and we'll hit the trail for higher 
timber." 

Bob Tidball replaced the spoil in the bag and tied the 



THE ROADS WE TAKE 81 

mouth of it tightly with a cord. When he looked up the 
most prominent object that he saw was the muzzle of Shark 
Dodson's .45 held upon him without a waver. 

"Stop your funnin'," said Bob, with a grin. "We got to 
be hittin' the breeze." 

"Set still," said Shark. "You ain't goin' to hit no breeze, 
Bob. I hate to tell you, but there ain't any chance for but 
one of us. BoUvar, he's plenty tired, and he can't carry 

double." 

"We been pards, me and you. Shark Dodson, for three 
year," Bob said quietly. "We've risked our lives together 
time and again. I've always give you a square deal, and I 
thought you was a man, I've heard some queer stories about 
you shootin' one or two men in a peculiar way, but I never 
believed 'em. Now if you're just havin' a little fun with me, 
Shark, put your gun up, and we'll get on Bolivar and vamose. 
If you mean to shoot— shoot, you blackhearted son of a 
tarantula!" 

Shark Dodson's face bore a deeply sorrowful look. 

"You don't know how bad I feel," he sighed, "about that 
sorrel of yourn breakin' his leg, Bob." 

The expression on Dodson's face changed in an instant to 
one of cold ferocity mingled with inexorable cupidity. The 
soul of the man showed itself for a moment like an evil face in 
the window of a reputable house. 

Truly Bob Tidball was never to "hit the breeze" again. 
The deadly .45 of the false friend cracked and filled the gorge 
with a roar that the walls hurled back with indignant echoes. 
And Bolivar, unconscious accomplice, swiftly bore away the 
last of the holders-up of the "Sunset Express," not put to the 
stress of "carrying double." 

But as Shark Dodson galloped away the woods seemed 
to fade from his view; the revolver in his right hand turned 
to the curved arm of a mahogany chair; his saddle was 
strangely upholstered, and he opened his eyes and saw his 
feet, not in stirrups, but resting quietly on the edge of a 
quartered-oak desk. 



82 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

I am telling you that Dodson, of the firm of Dodson & 
Decker, Wall Street brokers, opened his eyes. Peabody, the 
confidential clerk, was standing by his chair, hesitating to 
speak. There was a confused hum of wheels below, and the 
sedative buzz of an electric fan. 

"Ahem! Peabody," said Dodson, blinking. "I must 
have fallen asleep. I had a most remarkable dream. What 
is it, Peabody?" 

"Mr. WilHams, sir, of Tracy & Williams, is outside. He 
has come to settle his deal in X. Y. Z. The market caught 
him short, sir, if you remember." 

"Yes, I remember. What is X. Y. Z. quoted at to-day, 
Peabody.?" 

"One eighty-five, sir." 

"Then that's his price." 

"Excuse me," said Peabody, rather nervously, "for speak- 
ing of it, but I've been talking to Williams. He's an old 
friend of yours, Mr. Dodson, and you practically have a 
corner in X. Y. Z. I thought you might — that is, I thought 
you might not remember that he sold you the stock at 98. 
If he settles at the market price it will take every cent he has 
in the world and his home too to deliver the shares." 

The expression on Dodson's face changed in an instant to 
one of cold ferocity mingled with inexorable cupidity. The 
soul of the man show^ed itself for a moment like an evil face 
in the window of a reputable house. 

"He will settle at one eighty-five," said Dodson. " Bolivaj 
cannot carry double." 



THE FURNISHED ROOM 

From The Four Million. First published in The World, August 
14, 1904. To my mind this is O. Henry's greatest story, though, 
being without humor, it can hardly be called his most characteris- 
tic story. In unity, convergence of parts, purity of style, structural 
craftsmanship, saturation with the main idea, it stands alone. It 
is Poe in all his "totality of effect," Hawthorne in The House of the 
Seven Gables, Shakespeare when he set the weird sisters upon the 
heath to croak the curtained doom of Macbeth. Saintsbury in The 
English Novel, page 122, says of Smollett's Sir Launcelot Greaves; 
*T have always thought that the opening passage more than entitles 
the book to an honorable place in the history of English fiction. I do 
not know where to look, before it, for such an interior — such a com- 
plete Dutch picture of room and furniture and accessories gen- 
erally." Against Smollett's picture I should pit confidently 
O. Henry's paragraph beginning, "One by one, as the characters 
of a cryptograph become explicit, " etc. Indeed this room, this inte- 
rior, is one of the characters in the story, as is Dulcie's room in An 
Unfinished Story. 

Restless, shifting, fugacious as time itself is a certain vast 
bulk of the population of the red brick district of the lower 
West Side. Homeless, they have a hundred homes. They 
flit from furnished room to furnished room, transients forever 
— transients in abode, transients in heart and mind. They 
sing "Home, Sweet Home" in ragtime; they carry their lares 
et senates in a bandbox; their vine is entwined about a picture 
hat; a rubber plant is their fig tree. 

Hence the houses of this district, having had a thousand 
dwellers, should have a thousand tales to tell, mostly dull 
ones, no doubt; but it would be strange if there could not be 
found a ghost or two in the wake of all these vagrant guests. 

One evening after dark a young man prowled among these 

83 



84 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

crumbling red mansions, ringing their bells. At the twelfth 
he rested his lean hand-baggage upon the step and wiped the 
dust from his hat-band and forehead. The bell sounded 
faint and far away in some remote, hollow depths. 

To the door of this, the twelfth house whose bell he had 
rung, came a housekeeper who made him think of an un- 
wholesome, surfeited worm that had eaten its nut to a hollow 
shell and now sought to fill the vacancy with edible lodgers. 

He asked if there was a room to let. 

"Come in," said the housekeeper. Her voice came from 
her throat; her throat seemed lined with fur. "I have the 
third floor back, vacant since a week back. Should you wish 
to look at it.?^" 

The young man followed her up the stairs. A faint light 
from no particular source mitigated the shadows of the halls. 
They trod noiselessly upon a stair carpet that its own loom 
would have forsworn. It seemed to have become vegetable; 
to have degenerated in that rank, sunless air to lush lichen or 
spreading moss that grew in patches to the stair-case and was 
viscid under the foot like organic matter. At each turn of 
the stairs were vacant niches in the wall. Perhaps plants 
had once been set within them. If so they had died in that 
foul and tainted air. It may be that statues of the saints had 
stood there, but it was not difficult to conceive that imps and 
devils had dragged them forth in the darkness and down to 
the unholy depths of some furnished pit below. 

"This is the room," said the housekeeper, from her furry 
throat. "It's a nice room. It ain't often vacant. I had 
some most elegant people in it last summer — no trouble at 
all, and paid in advance to the minute. The w^ater's at the 
end of the hall. Sprowls and Mooney kept it three months. 
They done a vaudeville sketch. Miss B'retta Sprowls — 
you may have heard of her — Oh, that was just the stage 
names — right there over the dresser is where the marriage 
certificate hung, framed. The gas is here, and you see there 
is plenty of closet room. It's a room everybody likes. It 
never stays idle long." 



THE FURNISHED ROOM 85 

"Do you have many theatrical people rooming here?" 
asked the young man. 

"They comes and goes. A good proportion of my lodgers 
is connected with the theatres. Yes, sir, this is the theatrical 
district. Actor people never stays long anywhere. I get my 
share. Yes, they comes and they goes." 

He engaged the room, paying for a week in advance. 
He was tired, he said, and would take possession at once. 
He counted out the money. The room had been made 
ready, she said, even to towels and water. As the house- 
keeper moved away he put, for the thousandth time, the 
question that he carried at the end of his tongue. 

"A young girl — Miss Vashner — Miss Eloise Vashner — do 
you remember such a one among your lodgers? She would 
be singing on the stage, most likely. A fair girl, of medium 
height and slender, with reddish, gold hau* and a dark mole 
near her left eyebrow." 

"No, I don't remember the name. Them stage people 
has names they change as often as then- rooms. They comes 
and they goes. No, I don't call that one to mind." 

No. Always no. Five months of ceaseless interrogation 
and the mevitable negative. So much time spent by day in 
questioning managers, agents, schools, and choruses; by night 
among the audiences of theatres from all-star casts down to 
music halls so low that he dreaded to find what he most 
hoped for. He who had loved her best had tried to find her. 
He was sure that since her disappearance from home this 
great, water-girt city held her somewhere, but it was like a 
monstrous quicksand, shifting its particles constantly, with 
no foundation, its upper granules of to-day buried to-morrow 
in ooze and slime. 

The furnished room received its latest guest with a first 
glow of pseudo-hospitality, a hectic, haggard, perfunctory 
welcome like the specious smile of a demirep. The sophisti- 
cal comfort came in reflected gleams from the decayed furni- 
ture, the ragged brocade upholstery of a couch and two chairs, 
a foot-wide cheap pier glass between the two windows, from 



86 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

one or two gilt picture frames and a brass bedstead in a 
corner. 

The guest reclined, inert, upon a chair, while the room, 
confused in speech as though it were an apartment in Babel, 
tried to discourse to him of its divers tenantry. 

A polychromatic rug like some brilliant-flowered rectangu- 
lar, tropical islet lay surrounded by a billowy sea of soiled 
matting. Upon the gay-papered wall were those pictures 
that pursue the homeless one from house to house — The 
Huguenot Lovers, The First Quarrel, The Wedding Break- 
fast, Psyche at the Fountain. The mantel's chastely severe 
outline was ingloriously veiled behind some pert drapery 
dra^Ti rakishly askew like the sashes of the Amazonian 
ballet. Upon it was some desolate flotsam cast aside by the 
room's marooned when a lucky sail had borne them to a fresh 
port — a trifling vase or two, pictures of actresses, a medicine 
bottle, some stray cards out of a deck. 

One by one, as the characters of a cryptograph become 
explicit, the httle signs left by the furnished room's procession 
of guests developed a significance. The threadbare space in 
the rug in front of the dresser told that lovely woman had 
marched in the throng. The tiny finger prints on the wall 
spoke of little prisoners trying to feel their way to sun and 
air. A splattered stain, raying like the shadow of a bursting 
bomb, witnessed where a hurled glass or bottle had splintered 
with its contents against the wall. Across the pier glass had 
been scrawled with a diamond in staggering letters the name 
"Marie." It seemed that the succession of dwellers in the 
furnished room had turned in fury — perhaps tempted be- 
yond forebearance by its garish coldness — and wreaked 
upon it their passions. The furniture was chipped and 
bruised; the couch, distorted by bursting springs, seemed a 
horrible monster that had been slain during the stress of some 
grotesque convulsion. Some more potent upheaval had 
cloven a great slice from the marble mantel. Each plank in 
the floor owned its particular cant and shriek as from a sepa- 
rate and individual agony. It seemed incredible that all this 



THE FURNISHED ROOM 87 

malice and injury had been wrought upon the room by those 
who had called it for a time their home; and yet it may have 
been the cheated home instinct surviving blindly, the resent- 
ful rage at false household gods that had kindled their wrath. 
A hut that is our own we can sweep and adorn and cherish. 

The young tenant in the chair allowed these thoughts to 
file, soft-shod, through his mind, while there drifted into the 
room furnished sounds and furnished scents. He heard in 
one room a tittering and incontinent, slack laughter; in others 
the monologue of a scold, the rattling of dice, a lullaby, and 
one crymg dully; above him a banjo tinkled with spirit. 
Doors banged somewhere; the elevated trains roared inter- 
mittently; a cat yowled miserably upon a back fence. And 
he breathed the breath of the house— a dank savor rather 
than a smell— a cold, musty effluvium as from underground 
vaults mingled with the reeking exhalations of linoleum and 
mildewed and rotten woodwork. 

Then, suddenly, as he rested there, the room was filled with 
the strong, sweet odor of mignonette. It came as upon a 
single buffet of wind with such sureness and fragrance and 
emphasis that it almost seemed a living visitant. And the 
man cried aloud: *'What, dear?" as if he had been called, 
and sprang up and faced about. The rich odor clung to him 
and wrapped him around. He reached out his arms for it, 
all his senses for the time confused and commingled. How 
could one be peremptorily called by an odor? Surely it 
must have been a sound. But, was it not the sound that had 
touched, that had caressed him? 

"She has been in this room," he cried, and he sprang to 
wrest from it a token, for he knew he would recognize the 
smallest thing that had belonged to her or that she had 
touched. This envelopmg scent of mignonette, the odor 
that she had loved and made her own — ^whence came it? 

The room had been but carelessly set in order. Scattered 
upon the flimsy dresser scarf were half a dozen hairpins — 
those discreet, indistinguishable friends of womankmd, 
feminine of gender, infinite of mood, and uncommunicative of 



88 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

tense. These he ignored, conscious of their triumphant lack 
of identity. Ransacking the drawers of the dresser he came 
upon a discarded, tiny, ragged handkerchief. He pressed 
it to his face. It was racy and insolent with heliotrope; he 
hurled it to the floor. In another drawer he found odd but- 
tons, a theatre programme, a pawnbroker's card, two lost 
marshmallows, a book on the divination of dreams. In 
the last was a woman's black satin hair bow, which halted 
him, poised between ice and fire. But the black satin hair 
bow also is femininity's demure, impersonal, common orna- 
ment and tells no tales. 

And then he traversed the room like a hound on the scent, 
skimming the walls, considering the corners of the bulging 
matting on his hands and knees, rummaging mantel and 
tables, the curtains and hangings, the drunken cabinet in the 
corner, for a visible sign, unable to perceive that she was 
there beside, around, against, within, above him, clinging to 
him, wooing him, calling him so poignantly through the 
finer senses that even his grosser ones became cognizant of 
the call. Once again he answered loudly: "Yes, dear!" and 
turned, wild-eyed, to gaze on vacancy, for he could not yet 
discern form and color and love and outstretched arms in 
the odor of mignonette. Oh, God, whence that odor, and 
since when have odors had a voice to call.^^ Thus he groped. 

He burrowed in crevices and corners, and found corks and 
cigarettes. These he passed in passive contempt. But once 
he found in a fold of the matting a half -smoked cigar, and 
this he ground beneath his heel with a green and trenchant 
oath. He sifted the room from end to end. He found 
dreary and ignoble small records of many a peripatetic ten- 
ant; but of her whom he sought, and who may have lodged 
there, and whose spirit seemed to hover there, he found no 
trace. 

And then he thought of the housekeeper. 

He ran from the haunted room downstairs and to a dooi 
that showed a crack of light. She came out to his knock. 
He smothered his excitement as best he could. 



THE FURNISHED ROOM 89 

"Will you tell me, madam," he besought her, "who oc- 
cupied the room I have before I came?" 

"Yes, sir. I can tell you again. 'Twas Sprowls and 
Mooney, as I said. Miss B'retta Sprowls it was in the 
theatres, but Missis Mooney she was. My house is well 
known for respectability. The marriage certificate hung, 
framed, on a nail over " 

"What kind of a lady was Miss Sprowls — in looks, I 
mean?" 

"WTiy, black-haired, sir, short, and stout, with a comical 
face. They left a week ago Tuesday." 

"And before they occupied it?" 

"Why, there was a single gentleman connected with the 
draying business. He left owing me a week. Before him 
was Missis Crowder and her two children, that stayed four 
months; and back of them was old Mr. Doyle, whose sons 
paid for him. He kept the room six months. That goes 
back a year, sir, and further I do not remember." 

He thanked her and crept back to his room. The room was 
dead. The essence that had vivified it was gone. The per- 
fume of mignonette had departed. In its place was the old, 
stale odor of mouldy house furniture, of atmosphere in stor- 
age. 

The ebbing of his hope drained his faith. He sat staring 
at the yellow, singing gaslight. Soon he walked to the bed 
and began to tear the sheets into strips. With the blade of 
his knife he drove them tightly into every crevice around 
windows and door. When all was snug and taut he turned 
out the light, turned the gas full on again, and laid himself 
gratefully upon the bed. 



It was Mrs. McCool's night to go with the can for beer. 
So she fetched it and sat with Mrs. Purdy in one of those sub- 
terranean retreats where house-keepers foregather and the 
worm dieth seldom. 

"I rented out my third floor, back, this evening," said Mrs. 



90 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

Purdy, across a fine circle of foam. *'A young man took it 
He went up to bed two hours ago.'* 

*'Now, did ye, Mrs. Purdy, ma'am.^" said Mrs. McCool, 
with intense admiration. "You do be a wonder for rentin' 
rooms of that kind. And did ye tell him, then.?" she con- 
cluded in a husky whisper laden with mystery. 

"Rooms," said Mrs. Purdy, in her furriest tones, "are 
furnished for to rent. I did not tell him, Mrs. McCool." 

" 'Tis right ye are, ma'am; 'tis by renting rooms we kape 
alive. Ye have the rale sense for business, ma'am. There 
be many people will rayjict the rentin' of a room if they be 
tould a suicide has been after dyin' in the bed of it." 

"As you say, we has our living to be making," remarked 
Mrs. Purdy. 

"Yis, ma'am; 'tis true. 'Tis just one wake ago this day 
I helped ye lay out the third floor, back. A pretty slip of a 
colleen she was to be killin' herself wid the gas — a swate little 
face she had, Mrs. Purdy, ma'am." 

"She'd a-been called handsome, as you say," said Mrs. 
Purdy, assenting but critical, "but for that mole she had a- 
growin' by her left eyebrow. Do fill up your glass again, 
Mrs. McCool." 



MAKES THE WHOLE WORLD KIN 

From Sixes and Sevens. First published in The World, September 
25, 1904. Drugs and drug-store experiences enter into many of 
O. Henry's stories. As a boy he was a drug clerk in Greensboro, 
North Carolina, and later in Austin, Texas, and Columbus, Ohio. 
At a crisis in his career he owed freedom and probably life itself to his 
having been a registered pharmacist in his native town: see 
0. Henry Biography, pages 147-148. It should be remembered, too, 
that O. Henry found his now famous pen-name in the United States 
Dispensatory, the daily companion of every American drug clerk. 
O. Henry is the abbreviated name, just as it appears in the Dis- 
pensatory, of the celebrated French pharmacist, Etienne-Ossian 
Henry: see The Nation, New York, May 11, 1918, and Nouvelles de 
France, Paris, July 25, 1918. But it is not so much a special knowl- 
edge of drugs that this story reflects as the special kind of conver- 
sation that is heard in the drug store of a typical small town. It is 
here that patients of all classes gather to report on common ailments 
and to compare common remedies. Latent friendships are de- 
veloped via patent medicines. Makes the Whole World Kin does 
more than furnish a title to a single O. Henry story: it sums the 
service of them all. 



The burglar stepped inside the window quickly, and then 
he took his time. A burglar who respects his art always 
takes his time before taking anything else. 

The house was a private residence. By its boarded front 
door and untrimmed Boston ivy the burglar knew that the 
mistress of it was sitting on some oceanside piazza telling a 
sympathetic man in a yachting cap that no one had ever 
understood her sensitive, lonely heart. He knew by the light 
in the third-story front windows, and by the lateness of the 
season, that the master of the house had come home, and 
would soon extinguish his light and retire. For it was 

91 



92 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

September of the year and of the soul, in which season the 
house's good man comes to consider roof gardens and sten- 
ographers as vanities, and to desire the return of his mate 
and the more durable blessings of decorum and the moral 
excellencies. 

The burglar lighted a cigarette. The guarded glow of 
the match illuminated his salient points for a moment. He 
belonged to the third type of burglars. 

This third type has not yet been recognized and accepted. 
The police have made us familiar with the first and second. 
Their classification is simple. The collar is the distinguish- 
ing mark. 

When a burglar is caught who does not wear a collar he is 
described as a degenerate of the lowest type, singularly vi- 
cious and depraved, and is suspected of being the desperate 
criminal who stole the handcuffs out of Patrolman Hennessy's 
pocket in 1878 and walked away to escape arrest. 

The other well-known type is the burglar who wears a 
collar. He is always referred to as a Raffles in real life. He 
is invariably a gentleman by daylight, breakfasting in a dress 
suit, and posing as a paper-hanger, while after dark he plies 
his nefarious occupation of burglary. His mother is an ex- 
tremely wealthy and respected resident of Ocean Grove, and 
when he is conducted to his cell he asks at once for a nail 
file and the Police Gazette. He always has a wife in every 
State in the Union and fiancees in all the Territories, and the 
newspapers print his matrimonial gallery out of their stock 
of cuts of the ladies who were cured by only one bottle after 
having been given up by five doctors, experiencing great re- 
lief after the first dose. 

The burglar wore a blue sweater. He was neither a Raffles 
nor one of the chefs from Hell's Kitchen. The police would 
have been baffled had they attempted to classify him. They 
have not yet heard of the respectable, unassuming burglar 
who is neither above nor below his station. 

This burglar of the third class began to prowl. He wore no 
masks, dark lanterns, or gum shoes. He carried a 38-calibre 



MAKES THE WHOLE WORLD KIN 93 

revolver in his pocket, and he chewed peppermint gum 
thoughtfully. 

The furniture of the house was swathed in its summer dust 
protectors. The silver was far away in safe-deposit vaults. 
The burglar expected no remarkable "haul.'* His objective 
point was that dimly lighted room where the master of the 
house should be sleeping heavily after whatever solace he 
had sought to lighten the burden of his loneliness. A 
*' touch" might be made there to the extent of legitimate, 
fair professional profits — loose money, a watch, a jewelled 
stick-pin — nothing exorbitant or beyond reason. He had 
seen the window left open and had taken the chance. 

The burglar softly opened the door of the lighted room. 
The gas was turned low. A man lay in the bed asleep. 
On the dresser lay many things in confusion — a crumpled 
roll of bills, a watch, keys, three poker chips, crushed cigars, 
a pink silk hair bow, and an unopened bottle of bromo- 
seltzer for a bulwark in the morning. 

The burglar took three steps toward the dresser. The 
man in the bed suddenly uttered a squeaky groan and opened 
his eyes. His right hand slid under his pillow, but remained 
there. 

"Lay still," said the burglar in conversational tone. Bur- 
glars of the third type do not hiss. The citizen in the bed 
looked at the round end of the burglar's pistol and lay still. 

"Now hold up both your hands," commanded the burglar. 

The citizen had a little, pointed, brown-and-gray beard, 
like that of a painless dentist. He looked solid, esteemed, 
irritable, and disgusted. He sat up in bed and raised his 
right hand above his head. 

"Up with the other one," ordered the burglar. "You 
might be amphibious and shoot with your left. You can 
count two, can't you? Hurry up, now." 

"Can't raise the other one," said the citizen with a contor- 
tion of his lineaments. 

"What's the matter with it.?" 

"Rheumatism in the shoulder." 



94 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

" Inflammatory? " 

"Was. The inflammation has gone down." 

The burglar stood for a moment or two, holding his gun 
on the afilicted one. He glanced at the plunder on the 
dresser and then, with a half -embarrassed air back at the man 
in the bed. Then he, too, made a sudden grimace. 

"Don't stand there making faces," snapped the citizen, 
bad-humoredly. "If you've come to burgle why don't yoii 
do it? There's some stuff lying around." 

"'Sense me," said the burglar, with a grin: "but it just 
socked me one, too. It's good for you that rheumatism 
and me happens to be old pals. I got it in my left arm, too. 
Most anybody but me would have popped you when you 
wouldn't hoist that left claw of yours." 

"How long have you had it?" inquired the citizen. 

"Four years. I guess that ain't all. Once you've got it, 
it's you for a rheumatic life — that's my judgment." 

"Ever try rattlesnake oil?" asked the citizen, interestedly. 

"Gallons," said the burglar. "If all the snakes I've used 
the oil of was strung out in a row they'd reach eight times as 
far as Saturn, and the rattles could be heard at Valparaiso, 
Indiana, and back." 

"Some use Chiselum's Pills," remarked the citizen. 

"Fudge!" said the burglar. "Took 'em five months. No 
good. I had some relief the year I tried Finkelham's Ex- 
tract, Balm of Gilead poultices, and Potts's Pain Pulverizer; 
but I think it was the buckeye I carried in my pocket what 
done the trick." 

"Is yours worse in the morning or at night?" asked the 
citizen. 

"Night," said the burglar; "just when I'm busiest. Say, 

take down that arm of yours — I guess you won't Say ! 

did you ever try Blickerstaff's Blood Builder?" 

"I never did. Does yours come in paroxysms or is it a 
steady pain?" 

The burglar sat down on the foot of the bed and rested his 
gun on his crossed knee. 



MAKES THE WHOLE WORLD KIN 95 

"It jumps," said he. "It strikes me when I ain't looking 
for it. I had to give up second-story work because I got 
stuck sometimes half-way up. Tell you what— I don't be- 
lieve the bloomin' doctors know what is good for it." 

"Same here. I've spent a thousand dollars without get- 
ting any relief . Yours swell any?" 

*'0f mornings. And when it's goin' to rain— great Chris- 
topher!" .11. 
"Me, too," said the citizen. "I can tell when a streak of 
humidity the size of a tablecloth starts from Florida on its 
way to New York. And if I pass a theatre where there's an 
'East Lynne' matinee going on, the moisture starts my left 
arm jumping Uke a toothache." 

"It's undiluted— hades!" said the burglar. 
"You're dead right," said the citizen. 
The burglar looked down at his pistol and thrust it into 
his pocket with an awkward attempt at ease. 

"Say, old man," he said, constramedly, "ever try opo- 
deldoc?" „ ^ 

"Slop!" said the citizen angrily. "Might as well rub on 
restaurant butter." 

"Sure," concurred the burglar. "It's a salve suitable for 
little Minnie when the kitty scratches her finger. I'll tell 
you what! We're up against it. I only find one thing that 
eases her up. Hey? Little old sanitary, ameliorating, lest- 
we-forget Booze. Say— this job's off— 'sense me— get on 
70ur clothes and let's go out and have some. 'Sense the 
liberty, but — ouch! There she goes again!" 

"For a week," said the citizen, "I haven't been able to 
dress myself without help. I'm afraid Thomas is in bed, 

and " 

"Chmb out," said the burglar, "I'll help you get into 

your duds." 

The conventional returned as a tidal wave and flooded 
the citizen. He stroked his brown-and-gray beard. 

"It's very unusual " he began. 

"Here's your shirt," said the burglar, " fall out. I know a 



96 STORIES FROM 0. HENRY 

man who said Omberry's Ointment fixed him in two weeks so 
he could use both hands in tying his four-in-hand." 

As they were going out the door the citizen turned and 
started back. 

" 'Liked to forgot my money," he explained; "laid it on 
the dresser last night." 

The burglar caught him by the right sleeve. 

"Come on," he said bluffly. "I ask you. Leave it alone. 
I've got the price. Ever try witch hazel and oil of winter- 
green?" 



SQUARING THE CIRCLE 

From The Voice of the City. First published in The World, No- 
vember 27, 1904. This is the first one of our twenty-five stories 
that begins with a philosophical overture, with what O. Henry has 
called a "recitative by the chorus." But he was fond of such be- 
ginnings: see Ulysses and the Dogman, Dougherty's Eye-Opener , A 
Comedy in Rubbery The Green Door, The Voice of the City, The Har- 
binger, The Venturers, and A Municipal Report (page 224). These 
openings do not enable the reader to anticipate the denouement but, 
with the denouement reached and reviewed, they almost compel 
him to believe that no other was possible. It was the expositor in 
O. Henry, rather than the pure narrator, that prefixed these over- 
tures. They strike the keynote and enable the reader to attach the 
plot or plan of the story to a central motif. In this opening 
O. Henry was on familiar ground. Two years before, in Round the 
Circle, he had written: *'The straight line is Art. Nature moves 
in circles. A straightforward man is a more artificial product than a 
diplomatist is. Men lost in the snow travel in exact circles until 
they sink, exhausted, as their footprints have attested. Also, 
travelers in philosophy and other mental processes frequently wind 
up at their starting-point." See also Introduction to The Making of 
a Netv Yorker, page 111. 

At the hazard of wearying you this tale of vehement 
emotions must be prefaced by a discourse on geometry. 

Nature moves in circles; Art in straight lines. The nat< 
ural is rounded; the artificial is made up of angles. A man 
lost in the snow wanders, in spite of himself, in perfect cir- 
cles; the city man's feet, denaturalized by rectangular streets 
and floors, carry him ever away from himself. 

The round eyes of childhood typify innocence; the nar- 
rowed line of the flirt's optic proves the invasion of art. The 
hori^pntal mouth is the mark of determined cunning; who has 

87 



98 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

not read Nature's most spontaneous lyric in lips rounded 
for the candid kiss? 

Beauty is Nature in perfection; circularity is its chief at- 
tribute. Behold the full moon, the enchanting golf ball, 
the domes of splendid temples, the huckleberry pie, the wed- 
ding ring, the circus ring, the ring for the waiter, and the 
"round" of drinks. 

On the other hand, straight lines show that Nature has 
been deflected. Imagine Venus 's girdle transformed into a 
"straight front*'! 

When we begin to move in straight lines and turn sharp 
corners our natures begin to change. The consequence is 
that Nature, being more adaptive than Art, tries to conform 
to its sterner regulations. The result is often a rather curi- 
ous product — for instance: A prize chrysanthemum, wood 
alcohol whiskey, a Republican Missouri, cauliflower au gratiriy 
and a New Yorker. 

Nature is lost quickest in a big city. The cause is geomet- 
rical, not moral. The straight lines of its streets and archi- 
tecture, the rectangularity of its laws and social customs, 
the undeviating pavements, the hard, severe, depressing, un- 
compromising rules of all its ways — even of its recreations 
and sports — coldly exhibit a sneering defiance of the curved 
line of Nature. 

Wherefore, it may be said that the big city has demon- 
strated the problem of squaring the circle. And it may 
be added that this mathematical introduction precedes an 
account of the fate of a Kentucky feud that was imported 
to the city that has a habit of making its importations con- 
form to its angles. 

The feud began in the Cumberland Mountains between 
the Folwell and the Harkness families. The first victim of 
the homespun vendetta was a 'possum dog belonging to Bill 
Harkness. The Harkness family evened up this dire loss by 
laying out the chief of the Folwell clan. The Folwells were 
prompt at repartee. They oiled up their squirrel rifles and 
made it feasible for Bill Harkness to follow his dog to a land, 



SQUARING THE CIRCLE 99 

where the 'possums come down when treed without the stroke 
of an ax. 

The feud flourished for forty years. Harknesses were 
shot at the plough, through their lamp-Kt cabin windows, 
coming from camp-meeting, asleep, in duello, sober and 
otherwise, singly and in family groups, prepared and unpre- 
pared. Folwells had the branches of their family tree lopped 
off in similar ways, as the traditions of their country pre- 
scribed and authorized. 

By and by the pruning left but a single member of each 
family. And then Cal Harkness, probably reasoning that 
further pursuance of the controversy would give a too de- 
cided personal flavor to the feud, suddenly disappeared from 
the relieved Cumberlands, baulking the avenging hand of 
Sam, the ultimate opposing Folwell. 

A year afterward Sam Folwell learned that his hereditary, 
unsuppressed enemy was living in New York City. Sam 
turned over the big iron wash-pot in the yard, scraped off 
some of the soot, which he mixed with lard, and shined his 
boots with the compound. He put on his store clothes of 
butternut dyed black, a white shirt and collar, and packed 
a carpet-sack with Spartan lingerie. He took his squirrel 
rifle from its hooks, but put it back again with a sigh. How- 
ever ethical and plausible the habit might be in the Cumber- 
lands, perhaps New York would not swallow his pose of hunt- 
ing squirrels among the skyscrapers along Broadway. An 
ancient but reliable Colt's revolver that he resurrected from a 
bureau drawer seemed to proclaim itself the pink of weapons 
for metropolitan adventure and vengeance. This and a 
hunting-knife in a leather sheath, Sam packed in the carpet- 
sack. As he started, muleback, for the lowland railroad 
station the last Folwell turned in his saddle and looked 
grimly at the little cluster of white-pine slabs in the clump of 
cedars that marked the Folwell burying-ground. 

Sam Folwell arrived in New York in the night. Still 
moving and living in the free circles of nature, he did not 
perceive the formidable, pitiless, restless, fierce angles of the 



100 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

great city waiting in the dark to close about the rotundity 
of his heart and brain and mould him to the form of its mil- 
lions of reshaped victims. A cabby picked him out of the 
whirl, as Sam himself had often picked a nut from a bed of 
wind-tossed autumn leaves, and whisked him away to a hotel 
commensurate to his boots and carpet-sack. 

On the next morning the last of the Folwells made his 
sortie into the city that sheltered the last Harkness. The 
Colt was thrust beneath his coat and secured by a narrow 
leather belt; the hunting-knife hung between his shoulder- 
blades, with the haft an inch below his coat collar. He 
knew this much — that Cal Harkness drove an express wagon 
somewhere in that town, and that he, Sam Folwell, had come 
to kill him. And as he stepped upon the sidewalk the red 
came into his eye and the feud-hate into his heart. 

The clamor of the central avenues drew him thitherward. 
He had half expected to see Cal coming down the street in 
his shirt-sleeves, with a jug and a whip in his hand, just as 
he would have seen him in Frankfort or Laurel City. But 
an hour went by and Cal did not appear. Perhaps he was 
waiting in ambush, to shoot him from a door or a window. 
Sam kept a sharp eye on doors and windows for a while. 

About noon the city tired of playing with its mouse anr^. 
suddenly squeezed him with its straight lines. 

Sam Folwell stood where two great, rectangular arteries 
of the city cross. He looked four ways, and saw the world 
hurled from its orbit and reduced by spirit level and tape to 
an edged and cornered plane. All life moved on tracks, in 
grooves, according to system, within boundaries, by rote. 
The root of life was the cube root; the measure of existence 
was square measure. People streamed by in straight rows; 
the horrible din and crash stupefied him. 

Sam leaned against the sharp corner of a stone building. 
Those faces passed him by thousands, and none of them were 
turned toward him. A sudden foolish fear that he had died 
and was a spirit, and that they could not see him, seized him. 
And then the city smote him with loneliness. 



SQUARING THE CIRCLE 101 

A fat man dropped out of the stream and stood a few feet 
distant, waiting for his car. Sam crept to his side and 
shouted above the tumult into his ear: 

"The Rankinses' hogs weighed more'n ourn a whole passel, 
but the mast in thar neighborhood was a fine chance better 
than what it was down " 

The fat man moved away unostentatiously, and bought 
roasted chestnuts to cover his alarm. 

Sam felt the need of a drop of mountain dew. Across the 
street men passed in and out through swinging doors. Brief 
glimpses could be had of a glistening bar and its bedeckings. 
The feudist crossed and essayed to enter. Again had Art 
eliminated the familiar circle. Sam's hand found no door- 
knob — it slid, in vain, over a rectangular brass plate and 
polished oak with nothing even so large as a pin's head upon 
which his fingers might close. 

Abashed, reddened, heartbroken, he walked away from 
the bootless door and sat upon a step. A locust club tickled 
him in the ribs. 

*'Take a walk for yourself," said the policeman. "You've 
been loafing around here long enough." 

At the next corner a shrill whistle sounded in Sam's ear. 
He wheeled around and saw a black-browed villain scowling 
at him over peanuts heaped on a steaming machine. He 
started across the street. An immense engine, running with- 
out mules, with the voice of a bull and the smell of a smoky 
lamp, whizzed past, grazing his knee. A cab-driver bumped 
him with a hub and explained to him that kind words were 
invented to be used on other occasions. A motorman 
clanged his bell wildly and, for once in his life, corroborated 
a cab-driver. A large lady in a changeable silk waist dug an 
elbow into his back, and a newsy pensively pelted him with 
banana rinds, murmuring, " I hates to do it — but if anybody 
seen me let it pass!" 

Cal Harkness, his day's work over and his express wagon 
stabled, turned the sharp edge of the building that, by the 
cheek of architects, is modeled upon a safety razor. Out 



102 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

of the mass of hurrying people his eye picked up, three yards 
away, the surviving bloody and implacable foe of his kith 
and kin. 

He stopped short and wavered for a moment, being un- 
armed and sharply surprised. But the keen mountaineer's 
eye of Sam Folwell had picked him out. 

There was a sudden spring, a ripple in the stream of passers- 
by, and the sound of Sam's voice crying: 

"Howdy, Cal! I'm durned glad to see ye." 

And in the angles of Broadway, Fifth Avenue, and Twenty 
third Street the Cumberland feudists shook hands. 



THE COP AND THE ANTHEM 

From The Four Million. First published in The World, December 
4,1904. "The irony of fate!" we say on reading this story, or, 
with Foe, "The imp of the perverse!" But Foe's unp operated 
from within, never from without. The story is a perfect illustration 
of O. Henry's genius in taking the merest whifif or whimsy of an idea» 
the merest wraith or gossamer of a thought, and making of it some- 
thing solid, durable, appeahng. " On the technical side of his craft," 
says a writer in The Spectator (London, April 7, 1917), "he has 
probably never been surpassed either in fertility or ingenuity. The 
original themes on which he wove his stories are often of the very 
slightest description; but give him a mannerism, a racial contrast, 
an inverted proverb, to start with, and his inventive opulence would 
soon clothe it in a wealth of appropriate incident." Was O. Hemy 
greater in designing stories or in clothing them with appropriate 
incident? Mr. Firkins (see Introduction, page ix) would say the 
former; our anonymous English critic, the latter. If the two re- 
quirements must be distinguished, I should give first place to 
O.Henry's resourcefulness in filling in. It is not difficult to think of 
a plan or plot or thesis for a short story; but to flesh the skeleton, to 
make the abstract concrete, to hold the interest increasingly from 
first detail to last — this is the most exigent requirement laid upon 
the narrative artist. When we call a short story original, we refer of 
course to the blend of theme and development but more distmctively 
to development than to theme. The irony of fate is not a novel or 
origmal idea; Anatole France's short story, Crainquehille, develops 
the same motif . But the incarnation of the theme in Soapy is novel 
and original. Is there any story in our twenty-five in which you 
thmk the complementary detail falls below the excellence of the 
design.? 

On his bench in Madison Square Soapy moved uneasily. 
When wild geese honk high of nights, and when women with- 
out sealskin coats grow kind to their husbands, and when 

