"You, countess?" said the marquis, raising his eyebrows. 
"Your devotion is great, we know, but " 

"Listen!" exclaimed the lady, rising and resting her hands 
upon the table; "in a garret of this house lives a youth from 
the provinces as guileless and tender as the lambs he tended 
there. I have met him twice or thrice upon the stairs. I 
questioned him, fearing that he might dwell too near the 
room in which we are accustomed to meet. He is mine, if I 
will. He writes poems in his garret, and I think he dreams 
of me. He will do what I say. He shall take the message 
to the palace." 

The marquis rose from his chair and bowed. "You did 
not permit me to finish my sentence, countess," he said. "I 
would have said: 'Your devotion is great, but your wit and 
charm are infinitely greater. 

While the conspirators were thus engaged, David was pol- 
ishing some lines addressed to his amorette d'escalier. He 
heard a timorous knock at his door, and opened it, with a 
great throb, to behold her there, panting as one in straits, 
with eyes wide open and artless, like a child's. 

"Monsieur," she breathed, "I come to you in distress. I 
believe you to be good and true, and I know of no other help. 
How I flew through the streets among the swaggering men! 
Monsieur, my mother is dying. My uncle is a captain of 
guards in the palace of the king. Some one must fly to bring 
him. May I hope " 

"Mademoiselle," interrupted David, his eyes shining with 
the desire to do her service, "your hopes shall be my wings. 
Tell me how I may reach him." 

The lady thrust a sealed paper into his hand. 

"Go to the south gate — the south gate, mind — and say 
to the guards there, *The falcon has left his nest.' They 
will pass you, and you will go to the south entrance to the 
palace. Repeat the words, and give this letter to the man 
who will reply 'Let him strike when he will.' This is the 
password, monsieur, entrusted to me by my uncle, for now 
when the country is disturbed and men plot against the king's 



30 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

life, no one without it can gain entrance to the palace grounds 
after nightfall. If you will, monsieur, take him this letter 
so that my mother may see him before she closes her 
eyes." 

Give it me," said David, eagerly. "But shall I let you 
return home through the streets alone so late.^ I " 

"No, no — fly. Each moment is like a precious jewel. 
Some time," said the lady, with eyes long and cozening, like a 
gipsy's, "I will try to thank you for your goodness." 

The poet thrust the letter into his breast, and bounded 
doTVTi the stairway. The lady, when he was gone, returned to 
the room below. 

The eloquent eyebrows of the marquis interrogated her. 

"He is gone," she said, "as fleet and stupid as one of his 
own sheep, to deliver it." 

The table shook again from the batter of Captain Des- 
rolles's fist. 

"Sacred name!" he cried; "I have left my pistols behind! 
I can trust no others." 

"Take this," said the marquis, drawing from beneath his 
cloak a shining, great weapon, ornamented with carven 
silver. "There are none truer. But guard it closely, for it 
bears my arms and crest, and already I am suspected. Me, 
I must put many leagues between myself and Paris this night. 
To-morrow must find me in my chateau. After you, dear 
countess." 

The marquis puffed out the candle. The lady, well 
cloaked, and the two gentlemen softly descended the stairway 
and flowed into the crowd that roamed along the narrow 
pavements of the Rue Conti. 

David sped. At the south gate of the king's residence a 
halberd was laid to his breast, but he turned its point with 
the words: "The falcon has left his nest." 

"Pass, brother," said the guard, "and go quickly." 

On the south steps of the palace they moved to seize 
him, but again the mot de passe charmed the watchers. 
One smong them stepped forward and began: "Let him 



ROADS OF DESTINY 31 

strike " but a flurry among the guards told of a surprise. 

A man of keen look and soldierly stride suddenly pressed 
through them and seized the letter which David held in his 
hand. *' Come with me," he said, and led him inside the great 
hall. Then he tore open the letter and read it. He beckoned 
to a man uniformed as an officer of musketeers, who was pass- 
ing. "Captain Tetreau, you will have the guards at the 
south entrance and the south gate arrested and confined. 
Place men known to be royal in their places." To David he 
said: "Come with me." 

He conducted him through a corridor and an anteroom into 
a spacious chamber, where a melancholy man, sombrely 
dressed, sat brooding in a great, leather-covered chair. To 
that man he said: 

" Sire, I have told you that the palace is as full of traitors 
and spies as a sewer is of rats. You have thought, sire, that 
it was my fancy. This man penetrated to your very door 
by their connivance. He bore a letter which I have inter- 
cepted. I have brought him here that your majesty may 
Qo longer think my zeal excessive." 

"I will question him," said the king, stirring in his chair. 
He looked at David with heavy eyes dulled by an opaque 
film. The poet bent his knee. 

"From where do you come.^^" asked the king. 

"From the village of Vernoy, in the province of Eure-et- 
Loir, sire." 

"What do you follow in Paris?" 

"I — I would be a poet, sire." 

"What did you in Vernoy?" 

"I minded my father's flock of sheep." 

The king stirred again, and the film lifted from his eyes. 

"Ah! in the fields!" 

"Yes, sire." 

"You lived in the fields; you went out in the cool of the 
morning and lay among the hedges in the grass. The flock 
distributed itself upon the hillside; you drank of the living 
stream; you ate your sweet, brown bread in the shade, and 



32 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

you listened, doubtless, to blackbirds piping in the grove. Is 
not that so, shepherd?" 

**It is, sire," answered David, with a sigh; "and to the 
bees at the flowers, and, maybe, to the grape gatherers sing- 
ing on the hill." 

*'Yes, yes," said the king, impatiently; "maybe to them; 
but surely to the blackbirds. They whistled often, in the 
grove, did they not?" 

"Nowhere, sire, so sweetly as in Eure-et-Loir. I have 
endeavored to express their song in some verses that I have 
written." 

"Can you repeat those verses?" asked the king, eagerly. 
"A long time ago I listened to the blackbirds. It would be 
something better than a kingdom if one could rightly con- 
strue their song. And at night you drove the sheep to the 
fold and then sat, in peace and tranquillity, to your pleasant 
bread. Can you repeat those verses, shepherd?" 

"They run this way, sire," said David, with respectful 
ardor : 

"'Lazy shepherd, see your lambkins 
Skip, ecstatic, on the mead; 
See the firs dance in the breezes. 
Hear Pan blowing at his reed. 



'Hear us calling from the tree-tops. 
See us swoop upon your flock; 

Yield us wool to make our nests warm 
In the branches of the — ' ' 



"If it please your majesty," interrupted a harsh voice, "I 
will ask a question or two of this rhymester. There is little 
time to spare. I crave pardon, sire, if my anxiety for your 
safety offends." 

"The loyalty," said the king, "of the Duke d'Aumale is 
too well proven to give offence." He sank into his chair, and 
the film came again over his eyes. 



ROADS OF DESTINY 33 

"First," said the duke, '*I will read you the letter he 
brought : 

" *To-night is the anniversary of the dauphin's death. If he goes, 
as is his custom, to midnight mass to pray for the soul of his son, the 
falcon will strike, at the corner of the Rue Esplanade. If this be his 
intention, set a red light in the upper room at the southwest corner 
of the palace, that the falcon may take heed.' 

"Peasant," said the duke, sternly, "you have heard these 
words. Who gave you this message to bring?" 

"My lord duke," said David, sincerely, "I will tell you. 
A lady gave it me. She said her mother was ill, and that this 
writing would fetch her uncle to her bedside. I do not know 
the meaning of the letter, but I will swear that she is beautiful 
and good." 

"Describe the woman," commanded the duke, "and how 
you came to be her dupe." 

"Describe her!" said David with a tender smile. "You 
would command words to perform miracles. Well, she is 
made of sunshine and deep shade. She is slender, like the 
alders, and moves with their grace. Her eyes change while 
you gaze into them; now round, and then half shut as the 
sun peeps between two clouds. When she comes, heaven is 
all about her; when she leaves, there is chaos and a scent of 
hawthorn blossoms. She came to me in the Rue Conti, 
number twenty -nine." 

"It is the house," said the duke, turning to the king, 
"that we have been watching. Thanks to the poet's 
tongue, we have a picture of the infamous Countess 
Quebedaux." 

"Sire and my lord duke," said David, earnestly, "I hope 
my poor words have done no injustice. I have looked into 
that lady's eyes. I will stake my life that she is an angel, 
letter or no letter." 

The duke looked at him steadily. "I will put you to the 
proof," he said, slowly. "Dressed as the king, you shall. 



34 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

yourself, attend mass in his carriage at midnight. Do you 
accept the test?'* 

David smiled. "I have looked into her eyes," he said. 
"I had my proof there. Take yours how you will." 

Half an hour before twelve the Duke d'Aumale, with his 
own hands, set a red lamp in a southwest window of the pal- 
ace. At ten minutes to the hour, David, leaning on his arm, 
dressed as the king, from top to toe, with his head bowed in 
his cloak, walked slowly from the royal apartments to the 
waiting carriage. The duke assisted him inside and closed 
the door. The carriage whirled away along its route to the 
cathedral. 

On the qui vive in a house at the corner of the Rue Espla- 
nade w^as Captain Tetreau with twenty men, ready to pounce 
upon the conspirators when they should appear. 

But it seemed that, for some reason, the plotters had 
slightly altered their plans. When the royal carriage had 
reached the Rue Christopher, one square nearer than the Rue 
Esplanade, forth from it burst Captain Desrolles, with his 
band of would-be regicides, and assailed the equipage. The 
guards upon the carriage, though surprised at the premature 
attack, descended and fought valiantly. The noise of con- 
flict attracted the force of Captain Tetreau, and they came 
pelting down the street to the rescue. But, in the meantime, 
the desperate Desrolles had torn open the door of the king's 
carriage, thrust his weapon against the body of the dark fig- 
ure inside, and fired. 

Now, with loyal reinforcements at hand, the street rang 
with cries and the rasp of steel, but the frightened horses had 
dashed away. Upon the cushions lay the dead body of the 
poor mock king and poet, slain by a ball from the pistol of 
Monseigneur, the Marquis de Beaupertuys. 

The Main Road 

Three leagues, then, the road ran, and turned into a puzzle. 
It joined with another and a larger road at right angles, David 



ROADS OF DESTINY 35 

stood, uncertain, for a while, and then sat himself to rest upon 
its side. 

Whither those roads led he knew not. Either way there 
seemed to he a great world full of chance and peril. And 
then, sitting there, his eye fell upon a bright star, one that 
he and Yvonne had named for theirs. That set him think- 
ing of Yvonne, and he wondered if he had not been too hasty. 
Why should he leave her and his home because a few hot 
words had come between them.f^ Was love so brittle a thing 
that jealousy, the very proof of it, could break it.^ Mornings 
always brought a cure for the little heartaches of evening. 
There was yet time for him to return home without any one 
in the sweetly sleeping village of Vernoy being the wiser. His 
heart was Yvonne's; there where he had lived always he 
could write his poems and find his happiness. 

David rose, and shook off his unrest and the wild mood that 
had tempted him. He set his face steadfastly back along the 
road he had come. By the time he had retraveled the road 
to Vernoy, his desire to rove was gone. He passed the sheep- 
fold, and the sheep scurried, with a drumming flutter, at his 
late footsteps, warming his heart by the homely sound. He 
crept without noise into his little room and lay there, thankful 
that his feet had escaped the distress of new roads that night. 

How well he knew woman's heart! The next evening 
Yvonne was at the well in the road where the young con- 
gregated in order that the cure might have business. The 
corner of her eye was engaged in a search for David, albeit 
her set mouth seemed unrelenting. He saw the look; braved 
the mouth, drew from it a recantation and, later, a kiss as 
they walked homeward together. 

Three months afterward they were married. David's 
father was shrewd and prosperous. He gave them a wedding 
that was heard of three leagues away. Both the young 
people were favorites in the village. There was a procession 
in the streets, a dance on the green; they had the marionettes 
and a tumbler out from Dreux to delight the guests. 

Then a year, and David's father died. The sheep and the 



36 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

cottage descended to him. He already had the seemliest wife 
in the village. Yvonne's milk pails and her brass kettles were 
bright — ouf! they blinded you in the sun when you passed 
that way. But you must keep your eyes upon her 3-ard, for 
her flower beds were so neat and gay they restored to you 
your sight. Xnd you might hear her sing, aye, as far as 
the double chestnut tree above Pere Gruneau's blacksmith 
forge. 

But a day came when David drew out paper from a long- 
shut drawer, and began to bite the end of a pencil. Spring 
had come again and touched his heart. Poet he must have 
been, for now Yvonne was well-nigh forgotten. This fine 
new loveliness of earth held him with its witchery and grace» 
The perfume from her woods and meadows stirred him 
strangely. Daily had he gone forth with his flock, and 
brought it safe at night. But now he stretched himself under 
the hedge and pieced words together on his bits of paper. 
The sheep strayed, and the wolves, perceiving that difficult 
poems make easy mutton, ventured from the woods and stole 
his lambs. 

David's stock of poems grew larger and his flock smaller. 
Yvonne's nose and temper waxed sharp and her talk blunt. 
Her pans and kettles grew dufl, but her eyes had caught their 
flash. She pointed out to the poet that his neglect was re- 
ducing the flock and bringing woe upon the household. 
David hired a boy to guard the sheep, locked himself in the 
little room in the top of the cottage, and wrote more poems. 
The boy, being a poet by nature, but not furnished with an 
outlet in the way of writing, spent his time in slumber. The 
wolves lost no time in discovering that poetry and sleep are 
practically the same; so the flock steadily grew smaller. 
Yvonne's ill temper increased at an equal rate. Sometimes 
she would stand in the yard and rail at David through his 
high window. Then you could hear her as far as the double 
chestnut tree above Pere Gruneau's blacksmith forge. 

M. Papineau, the kind, wise, meddling old notary, saw 
this, as he saw everything at which his nose pointed. He 



ROADS OF DESTINY 37 

went to David, fortified himself with a great pinch of snuff, 
and said: 

"Friend Mignot, I affixed the seal upon the marriage cer- 
tificate of your father. It would distress me to be obliged to 
attest a paper signifying the bankruptcy of his son. But 
that is what you are coming to. I speak as an old friend. 
Now% listen to what I have to say. You have your heart set, 
I perceive, upon poetry. At Dreux, I have a friend, one 
Monsieur Bril — Georges Bril. He fives in a fittle cleared 
space in a houseful of books. He is a learned man; he visits 
Paris each year; he himself has written books. He will tell 
you when the catacombs were made, how they found out the 
names of the stars, and why the plover has a long bill. The 
meaning and the form of poetry is to him as intelligent as the 
baa of a sheep is to you. I will give you a letter to him, and 
you shall take him your poems and let him read them. Then 
you will know if you shall write more, or give your attention 
to your wife and business." 

"Write the letter," said David, "I am sorry you did not 
speak of this sooner." 

At sunrise the next morning he was on the road to Dreux 
with the precious roll of poems under his arm. At noon he 
mped the dust from his feet at the door of Monsieur Bril. 
That learned man broke the seal of M. Papineau's letter, and 
sucked up its contents through his gleaming spectacles as the 
sun draws water. He took David inside to his study and sat 
him down upon a little island beat upon by a sea of books. 

Monsieur Bril had a conscience. He flinched not even at 
a mass of manuscript the thickness of a finger length and 
rolled to an incorrigible curve. He broke the back of the 
roll against his knee and began to read. He slighted nothing: 
he bored into the lump as a worm into a nut, seeking for a 
kernel. 

Meanwhile, David sat, marooned, trembling in the spray 
of so much literature. It roared in his ears. He held no 
chart or compass for voyaging in that sea. Half the world, 
he thought, must be writing books. 



38 STORIES FROM O. HENRY 

Monsieur Bril bored to the last page of the poems. Then 
he took off his spectacles and wiped them with his handker- 
chief. 

"My old friend, Papineau, is well.'^" he asked. 

"In the best of health," said David. 

"How many sheep have you, Monsieur Mignot.'^" 

"Three hundred and nine, when I counted them yesterday. 
The flock has had ill fortune. To that number it has de- 
creased from eight hundred and fifty." 

"You have a wife and a home, and lived in comfort. The 
sheep brought you plenty. You went into the fields with 
them and lived in the keen air and ate the sweet bread of 
contentment. You had but to be vigilant and recline there 
upon nature's breast, listening to the whistle of the black- 
birds in the grove. Am I right thus far.?" 

"It was so," said David. 

"I have read all your verses," continued Monsieur Bril, 
his eyes wandering about his sea of books as if he conned the 
horizon for a sail. "Look yonder, through that window, 
Monsieur Mignot; tell me what you see in that tree." 

"I see a crow," said David, looking. 

"There is a bird," said Monsieur Bril, "that shall assist 
me where I am disposed to shirk a duty. You know that 
bird. Monsieur Mignot; he is the philosopher of the air. He 
is happy through submission to his lot. None so merry or 
full-crawed as he with his whimsical eye and rollicking step. 
The fields yield him what he desires. He never grieves that 
his plumage is not gay, like the oriole's. And you have 
heard. Monsieur Mignot, the notes that nature has given 
him.^ Is the nightingale any happier, do you think.?" 

David rose to his feet. The crow cawed harshly from his 
tree. 

"I thank you, Monsieur Bril," he said, slowly. "There 
was not, then, one nightingale note among all those croaks.?" 

"I could not have missed it," said Monsieur Bril, with a 
sigh. "I read every word. Live your poetry, man; do not 
try to write it any more." 
